A Guide to Air Quality and 
Your Health
Recycled/recyclable. Printed with vegetable oil-based 
inks on 100% postconsumer process, chlorine-free 
recycled paper.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards
Outreach and Information Division
Research Triangle Park, NC
February 2014
EPA-456/F-14-002
“Local air quality is very 
unhealthy today.” 
“It’s a code red day 
for ozone.”
“Particle pollution levels are 
forecast to be unhealthy 
for sensitive groups.”
You may hear these alerts on radio 
or TV or read them in the newspaper. 
But what do they mean if you: 
f 
Are active outdoors?
f 
Have children who play outdoors?
f 
Are an older adult?
f 
Have heart or lung disease?
This booklet will help you understand 
how to find out about air quality in 
your area and protect your health.
1
Air Quality Index
Why is air quality 
important?
Local air quality affects how 
you live and breathe. Like 
the weather, it can change 
from day to day or even 
hour to hour. The U.S. 
Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) and your 
local air quality agency 
have been working to make 
information about outdoor 
air quality as easy to find 
and understand as weather 
forecasts. A key tool in this 
effort is the Air Quality Index, or AQI. EPA and local offi-
cials use the AQI to provide simple information about your 
local air quality, how unhealthy air may affect you, and how 
you can protect your health.
What is the AQI? 
The AQI is an index for reporting daily air quality. It tells 
you how clean or unhealthy your air is, and what associ-
ated health effects might be a concern. The AQI focuses on 
health effects you may experience within a few hours or days 
after breathing unhealthy air. The AQI is calculated for four 
major air pollutants regulated by the Clean Air Act: ground-
level ozone, particle pollution, carbon monoxide, and sulfur 
dioxide. For each of these pollutants, EPA has established 
national air quality standards to protect public health.
EPA is currently reviewing the national air quality standard 
for nitrogen dioxide.   If the standard is revised, the AQI 
will be revised as well.  
Air quality directly affects our quality 
of life.
How does the AQI work? 
Think of the AQI as a yardstick that runs from 0 to 500. 
The higher the AQI value, the greater the level of air pol-
lution and the greater the health concern. For example, an 
AQI value of 50 represents good air quality with little or no 
potential to affect public health, while an AQI value over 
300 represents air quality so hazardous that everyone may 
experience serious effects. 
An AQI value of 100 generally corresponds to the national air 
quality standard for the pollutant, which is the level EPA has set 
to protect public health. AQI values at or below 100 are generally 
thought of as satisfactory. When AQI values are above 100, air 
quality is considered to be unhealthy—at first for certain sensitive 
groups of people, then for everyone as AQI values increase.
What do the AQI values mean?
The purpose of the AQI is to help you understand what local 
air quality means to your health. To make it easier to under-
stand, the AQI is divided into six levels of health concern:
Air Quality Index  
(AQI) Values
Levels of 
Health Concern
Colors
When the AQI is in 
this range:
...air quality 
conditions are:
...as symbolized 
by this color:
0 to 50 
Good
Green
51 to 100
Moderate
Yellow
101 to 150
Unhealthy for 
Sensitive Groups
Orange
151 to 200
Unhealthy
Red
201 to 300
Very Unhealthy
Purple
301 to 500
Hazardous
Maroon
2
Air Quality Index
Each category corresponds to a different level of health concern: 
• Good. The AQI value for your community is between  
0 and 50. Air quality is satisfactory and poses little or no 
health risk. 
• Moderate. The AQI is between 51 and 100. Air quality 
is acceptable; however, pollution in this range may pose a 
moderate health concern for a very small number of indi-
viduals. People who are unusually sensitive to ozone or 
particle pollution may experience respiratory symptoms. 
• Unhealthy for Sensitive Groups. When AQI values 
are between 101 and 150, members of sensitive groups 
may experience health effects, but the general public is 
unlikely to be affected. 
• Ozone: People with lung disease, children, older adults, 
and people who are active outdoors are considered 
sensitive and therefore at greater risk.
• Particle pollution: People with heart or lung disease, 
older adults,1 and children are considered sensitive and 
therefore at greater risk.
• Unhealthy. Everyone may begin to experience health effects 
when AQI values are between 151 and 200. Members of 
sensitive groups may experience more serious health effects. 
• Very Unhealthy. AQI values between 201 and 300 
trigger a health alert, meaning everyone may experience 
more serious health effects. 
• Hazardous. AQI values over 300 trigger health warnings 
of emergency conditions. The entire population is even 
more likely to be affected by serious health effects. 
How is a community’s AQI calculated  
and reported? 
Each day, monitors record concentrations of the major pol-
lutants at more than a thousand locations across the country. 
1	 Due to the normal aging process, older adults may experience increased 
health risks from exposure to unhealthy air. Studies indicate that some 
people become more sensitive in their mid-60s. However, the risk of 
heart attacks, and thus the risk from particle pollution, may begin as 
early as the mid-40s for men and mid-50s for women.
These raw measurements are converted into a separate AQI 
value for each pollutant (ground-level ozone, particle pollu-
tion, carbon monoxide, and sulfur dioxide) using standard 
formulas developed by EPA. The highest of these AQI values 
is reported as the AQI value for that day.2
In large cities (more than 350,000 people), state and local 
agencies are required to report the AQI to the public daily. 
Many smaller communities also report the AQI as a public 
health service.
When the AQI is above 100, agencies must also report 
which groups, such as children or people with asthma or 
heart disease, may be sensitive to that pollutant. If two or 
more pollutants have AQI values above 100 on a given day, 
agencies must report all the groups that are sensitive to those 
pollutants. For example, if a community’s AQI is 130 for 
ozone and 101 for particle pollution, the AQI value for that 
day would be announced as 130 for ozone. The announce-
ments would note that particle pollution levels were also 
high and would alert groups sensitive to ozone or particle 
pollution about how to protect their health.
Many cities also provide forecasts for the next day’s AQI. 
These forecasts help local residents protect their health by 
alerting them to plan their strenuous outdoor activities for a 
time when air quality is better.
2	 For more information on how the AQI is calculated, see “Technical 
Assistance Document for the Reporting of Daily Air Quality—the Air 
Quality Index (AQI)” in the “Publications” section of www.airnow.gov.
Children active outdoors can be sensitive to air pollutants. 
3
Air Quality Index
The AQI is a national index, so the values and colors used 
to show local air quality and the levels of health concern are 
the same everywhere in the United States. 
Where can I find the AQI? 
Checking local air quality is as easy as checking the weather. 
You can find the latest AQI values on the Internet, in your 
local media, and on many state and local telephone hotlines. 
You can also sign up to receive AQI forecasts by e-mail: 
• AQI on the Internet. EPA and its federal, tribal, state, and 
local partners have developed an AIRNow Web site to 
provide the public with easy access to national air quality 
information. At www.airnow.gov, you will find daily AQI 
forecasts and real-time AQI conditions for over 300 cities 
across the United States, with links to more detailed state 
and local air quality Web sites. AIRNow’s reports are 
displayed as maps you can use to quickly determine if the 
air quality is unhealthy near you.  
• AQI via e-mail. Sign up for EnviroFlash  
(www.enviroflash.info), a free service that will alert  
you via e-mail when air quality is forecast to be a  
concern in your area.
Example of a national AQI map available on the AIRNow Web site.
• AQI in the media. Many local media—television, radio, 
and newspapers—and some national media (such as USA 
Today, The Weather Channel, and CNN) provide daily 
air quality reports, often as part of the weather forecast. 
Here’s the type of report you might hear: 
What are typical AQI values in  
most communities? 
In many U.S. communities, AQI values are usually below 
100, with higher values occurring just a few times a year. 
Larger cities typically have more air pollution than smaller 
cities, so their AQI values may exceed 100 more often. AQI 
values higher than 200 are infrequent, and AQI values above 
300 are extremely rare—they generally occur only during 
events such as forest fires. You can compare the air quality of 
U.S. cities and find out about quality trends in your area by 
visiting “Air Compare” at www.epa.gov/aircompare/. 
AQI values can vary from one season to another. In winter, 
carbon monoxide may be high in some areas because cold 
weather makes it difficult for car emission control systems to 
operate effectively. Ozone is often higher in warmer months, 
because heat and sunlight increase ozone formation. Particle 
pollution can be elevated any time of the year.
AQI values also can vary depending on the time of day. 
Ozone levels often peak in the afternoon to early evening. 
Carbon monoxide may be a problem during morning or 
evening rush hours. And particle pollution can be high any 
time of day, and is often elevated near busy roadways, espe-
cially during morning or evening rush hours.
Tomorrow will be a code red air quality day for Center 
City. The cold winter air, morning traffic, and wood 
smoke are expected to cause particle pollution to rise to 
unhealthy levels. People with heart or lung disease,  
older adults, and children should avoid prolonged or 
heavy physical activities.
4
Air Quality Index
How can I avoid being exposed to 
unhealthy air? 
You can take simple steps to reduce your exposure to 
unhealthy air. First, you need to find out whether AQI levels 
are a concern in your area. You can do this, as described 
previously, by visiting the AIRNow Web site, signing up for 
EnviroFlash, or checking your local media. If the AQI for 
ozone, particle pollution, carbon monoxide, or sulfur dioxide 
is a concern in your area, you can learn what steps to take to 
protect your health by checking the charts on the following 
pages. Two important terms you will need to understand are:   
• Prolonged exertion. This means any outdoor activity that 
you’ll be doing intermittently for several hours and that 
makes you breathe slightly harder than normal. A good 
example of this is working in the yard for part of a day. 
When air quality is unhealthy, you can protect your health 
by reducing how much time you spend on this type of 
activity. 
• Heavy exertion. This means intense outdoor activi-
ties that cause you to breathe hard. When air quality 
is unhealthy, you can protect your health by reducing 
how much time you spend on this type of activity, or by 
substituting a less intense activity—for example, go for a 
walk instead of a jog. Be sure to reduce your activity level 
if you experience any unusual coughing, chest discom-
fort, wheezing, breathing difficulty, or unusual fatigue. 
What is ozone? 
Ozone is a gas found in the air we breathe. Ozone can be 
good or bad, depending where it occurs: 
• Good ozone is present naturally in the Earth’s upper 
atmosphere—approximately 6 to 30 miles above the 
Earth’s surface. This natural ozone shields us from the 
sun’s harmful ultraviolet rays. 
• Bad ozone forms near the ground when pollutants 
(emitted by sources such as cars, power plants, industrial 
boilers, refineries, and chemical plants) react chemically 
in sunlight. Ozone pollution is more likely to form dur-
ing warmer months. This is when the weather conditions 
normally needed to form ground-level ozone—lots of 
sun—occur. 
Who is most at risk? 
Several groups of people are particularly sensitive to ozone, 
especially when they are active outdoors. This is because ozone 
levels are higher outdoors, and physical activity causes faster 
and deeper breathing, drawing more ozone into the body.
• People with lung diseases, such as asthma, chronic 
bronchitis, and emphysema, can be particularly sensitive 
to ozone. They will generally experience more serious 
health effects at lower levels. Ozone can aggravate their 
diseases, leading to increased medication use, doctor and 
emergency room visits, and hospital admissions.
• Children, including teenagers, are at higher risk from ozone 
exposure because they often play outdoors in warmer weather 
when ozone levels are higher, they are more likely to have 
asthma (which may be aggravated by ozone exposure), and 
their lungs are still developing.
• Older adults may be more affected by ozone exposure, 
possibly because they are more likely to have pre-existing 
lung disease.
ozone 
Heavy exertion means an intense activity that causes you to breathe hard.
5
Air Quality Index
• Active people of all ages who exercise or work vigorously 
outdoors are at increased risk. 
• Some healthy people are more sensitive to ozone. They 
may experience health effects at lower ozone levels than 
the average person even though they have none of the 
risk factors listed above. There may be a genetic basis for 
this increased sensitivity.
In general, as concentrations of ground-level ozone increase, 
more people begin to experience more serious health effects. 
When levels are very high, everyone should be concerned 
about ozone exposure. 
What are the health effects?
Ozone affects the lungs and respiratory system in many 
ways. It can:
• Irritate the respiratory system, causing coughing, 
throat soreness, airway irritation, chest tightness, or chest 
pain when taking a deep breath. 
• Reduce lung function, making it more difficult to 
breathe as deeply and vigorously as you normally would, 
especially when exercising. Breathing may start to feel 
uncomfortable, and you may notice that you are taking 
more rapid and shallow breaths than normal. 
The risk of exposure to unhealthy levels of ground-level ozone is  
greatest during warmer months. Children, who often play outdoors  
in warmer weather, are at higher risk.
• Inflame and damage the cells that line the lungs. 
Within a few days, the damaged cells are replaced and 
the old cells are shed—much like the way your skin peels 
after sunburn. Studies suggest that if this type of inflam-
mation happens repeatedly, lung tissue may become 
permanently scarred and lung function may be perma-
nently reduced .
• Make the lungs more susceptible to infection. Ozone 
reduces the lung’s defenses by damaging the cells that 
move particles and bacteria out of the airways and by 
reducing the number and effectiveness of white blood 
cells in the lungs.
• Aggravate asthma. When ozone levels are unhealthy, 
more people with asthma have symptoms that require a 
doctor’s attention or the use of medication. Ozone makes 
people more sensitive to allergens—the most common 
triggers for asthma attacks. Also, asthmatics may be more 
severely affected by reduced lung function and airway 
inflammation. People with asthma should ask their 
doctor for an asthma action plan and follow it carefully 
when ozone levels are unhealthy. 
• Aggravate other chronic lung diseases such as 
emphysema and bronchitis. As concentrations of 
ground-level ozone increase, more people with lung 
disease visit doctors or emergency rooms and are 
admitted to the hospital. 
• Cause permanent lung damage. Repeated short-term 
ozone damage to children’s developing lungs may lead 
to reduced lung function in adulthood. In adults, ozone 
exposure may accelerate the natural decline in lung func-
tion that occurs with age.
6
Air Quality Index
How can I protect my health at different 
AQI values?
*
 
An AQI of 100 for ozone corresponds to an ozone level of 0.075 parts per 
million (averaged over 8 hours).
AQI Value
Actions to Protect Your Health 
From Ozone
Good  
(0–50)
None
Moderate 
(51–100*) 
Unusually sensitive people should consider 
reducing prolonged  or heavy outdoor 
exertion.
Unhealthy 
for 
Sensitive 
Groups  
(101–150)
The following groups should reduce 
prolonged or heavy outdoor exertion:
• People with lung disease, such as asthma
• Children and older adults
• People who are active outdoors
Unhealthy  
(151–200)
The following groups should avoid 
prolonged or heavy outdoor exertion:
• People with lung disease, such as asthma
• Children and older adults
• People who are active outdoors
Everyone else should limit prolonged 
outdoor exertion.
Very 
Unhealthy  
(201–300)
The following groups should avoid all 
outdoor exertion:
• People with lung disease, such as asthma
• Children and older adults
• People who are active outdoors
Everyone else should limit outdoor 
exertion.
Particle pollution
What is particle pollution? 
Particle pollution (also known as “particulate matter”) con-
sists of a mixture of solids and liquid droplets. Some particles 
are emitted directly; others form when pollutants emitted 
by various sources react in the atmosphere. Particle pollu-
tion levels can be very unhealthy and even hazardous during 
events such as forest fires. Particle levels can be elevated 
indoors, especially when outdoor particle levels are high.
Particles come in a wide range of sizes. Those less than 10 
micrometers in diameter (smaller than the width of a single 
human hair) are so small that they can get into the lungs, 
where they can cause serious health problems.  
• Fine particles. The smallest particles (those 2.5  
micrometers or less in diameter) are called “fine” par-
ticles. These particles are so small they can be detected 
only with an electron microscope. Major sources of fine 
particles include motor vehicles, power plants, residential 
wood burning, forest fires, agricultural burning, some 
industrial processes, and other combustion processes. 
• Coarse particles. Particles between 2.5 and 10 microm-
eters in diameter are referred to as “coarse.” Sources of 
coarse particles include crushing or grinding operations, 
and dust stirred up by vehicles traveling on roads. 
What are the health effects and who is 
most at risk? 
Particles smaller than 10 micrometers in diameter can cause 
or aggravate a number of health problems and have been 
linked with illnesses and deaths from heart or lung disease. 
These effects have been associated with both short-term 
exposures (usually over 24 hours, but possibly as short as 
one hour) and long-term exposures (years). 
Sensitive groups for particle pollution include people with 
heart or lung disease (including heart failure and coronary 
artery disease, or asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
7
Air Quality Index
disease), older adults (who may have undiagnosed heart or 
lung disease), and children. The risk of heart attacks, and 
thus the risk from particle pollution, may begin as early as 
the mid-40s for men and mid-50s for women.
• When exposed to particle pollution, people with heart 
or lung diseases and older adults are more likely to visit 
emergency rooms, be admitted to hospitals, or in some 
cases, even die. 
• Exposure to particle pollution may cause people with 
heart disease to experience chest pain, palpitations, 
shortness of breath, and fatigue. Particle pollution has 
also been associated with cardiac arrhythmias and heart 
attacks. 
• When exposed to high levels of particle pollution, people 
with existing lung disease may not be able to breathe as 
deeply or vigorously as they normally would. They may 
experience symptoms such as coughing and shortness of 
breath. Healthy people also may experience these effects, 
although they are unlikely to experience more serious effects. 
• Particle pollution also can increase susceptibility to respi-
ratory infections and can aggravate existing respiratory 
Smoke from old, uncertified wood stoves is a major source of particle 
pollution in some communities. For information on cleaner-burning wood 
stoves that are more energy efficient, go to www.epa.gov/woodstoves.
AQI Value
Actions To Protect Your Health 
From Particle Pollution
Good  
(0–50)
None
Moderate 
(51–100*) 
Unusually sensitive people should 
consider reducing prolonged or heavy 
exertion. 
Unhealthy 
for Sensitive 
Groups  
(101–150)
The following groups should reduce 
prolonged or heavy exertion:
• People with heart or lung disease
• Children and older adults
Unhealthy  
(151–200)
The following groups should avoid 
prolonged or heavy exertion:
• People with heart or lung disease
• Children and older adults
Everyone else should reduce 
prolonged or heavy exertion.
Very Unhealthy  
(201–300)
The following groups should avoid all 
physical activity outdoors:
• People with heart or lung disease
• Children and older adults
Everyone else should avoid prolonged 
or heavy exertion.
* 
For particles up to 2.5 micrometers in diameter: An AQI of 100 corresponds 
to 35 micrograms per cubic meter (averaged over 24 hours).
For particles up to 10 micrometers in diameter: An AQI of 100 corresponds 
to 150 micrograms per cubic meter (averaged over 24 hours).
diseases, such as asthma and chronic bronchitis, causing 
more use of medication and more doctor visits. 
How can I protect my health at different 
AQI values?
8
Air Quality Index
carbon monoxide
What is carbon monoxide? 
Carbon monoxide is an odorless, colorless gas. It forms 
when the carbon in fuels does not completely burn. Vehicle 
exhaust contributes roughly 75 percent of all carbon mon-
oxide emissions nationwide, and up to 95 percent in cities. 
Other sources include fuel combustion in industrial processes 
and natural sources such as wildfires. Carbon monoxide 
levels typically are highest during cold weather, because cold 
temperatures make combustion less complete and cause inver-
sions that trap pollutants close to the ground. 
What are the health effects and who is 
most at risk? 
Carbon monoxide enters the bloodstream through the lungs 
and binds to hemoglobin, the substance in blood that carries 
oxygen to cells. It reduces the amount of oxygen reaching 
the body’s organs and tissues.
• People with cardiovascular disease, such as coronary artery 
disease, are most at risk. They may experience chest pain 
and other cardiovascular symptoms if they are exposed to 
carbon monoxide, particularly while exercising. 
• People with marginal or compromised cardiovascular 
and respiratory systems (for example, individuals with 
congestive heart failure, cerebrovascular disease, anemia, 
or chronic obstructive lung disease), and possibly young 
infants and fetuses, also may be at greater risk from car-
bon monoxide pollution. 
• In healthy individuals, exposure to higher levels of car-
bon monoxide can affect mental alertness and vision. 
How can I protect my health at different 
AQI values?
About half of all carbon monoxide emissions nationwide come from the exhaust 
of roadway vehicles. Exhaust from all types of vehicles (including marine vessels, 
aircraft, locomotives, and mobile equipment) contributes around three-quarters 
of all carbon monoxide emissions in the United States. 
AQI Value
Actions To Protect Your Health 
From Carbon Monoxide
Good  
(0–50)
None
Moderate 
(51–100*)
None
Unhealthy 
for Sensitive 
Groups 
(101–150)
People with heart disease, such 
as angina, should reduce heavy 
exertion and avoid sources of carbon 
monoxide, such as heavy traffic. 
Unhealthy 
(151–200)
People with heart disease, such as 
angina, should reduce moderate 
exertion and avoid sources of carbon 
monoxide, such as heavy traffic. 
Very Unhealthy 
(201–300)
People with heart disease, such as 
angina, should avoid exertion and 
sources of carbon monoxide, such as 
heavy traffic. 
* An AQI of 100 for carbon monoxide corresponds to a level of 9 parts per 
million (averaged over 8 hours).
9
Air Quality Index
sulfur dioxide
What is sulfur dioxide? 
Sulfur dioxide, a colorless, reactive gas, is produced when 
sulfur-containing fuels such as coal and oil are burned. 
Generally, the highest levels of sulfur dioxide are found near 
large industrial complexes. Major sources include power 
plants, refineries, and industrial boilers.
What are the health effects and who is 
most at risk? 
Sulfur dioxide is an irritant gas that is removed by the nasal 
passages. Moderate activity levels that trigger mouth breath-
ing, such as a brisk walk, are needed for sulfur dioxide to 
cause health effects in most people.
• People with asthma who are physically active outdoors 
are most likely to experience the health effects of sulfur 
dioxide. The main effect, even with very brief exposure 
(minutes), is a narrowing of the airways (called bron-
choconstriction). This may be accompanied by wheez-
ing, chest tightness, and shortness of breath, which 
may require use of medication that opens the airways. 
Symptoms increase as sulfur dioxide levels or breathing 
rate increases. When exposure to sulfur dioxide ceases, 
lung function typically returns to normal within an hour, 
even without medication. 
• At very high levels, sulfur dioxide may cause wheezing, 
chest tightness, and shortness of breath even in healthy 
people who do not have asthma. 
• Long-term exposure to sulfur dioxide may cause respira-
tory symptoms and illness, and aggravate asthma. People 
with asthma are the most susceptible to sulfur dioxide. 
However, people with other chronic lung diseases or car-
diovascular disease, as well as children and older adults, 
may also be susceptible to these effects.
How can I protect my health at different 
AQI values?
*	An AQI of 100 for sulfur dioxide corresponds to a level of 75 parts per bil-
lion (averaged over one hour).
AQI Value
Actions To Protect Your Health 
From Sulfur Dioxide
Good  
(0–50)
None
Moderate 
(51–100*)
None
Unhealthy for 
Sensitive Groups 
(101–150)
People with asthma should consider 
reducing exertion outdoors. 
Unhealthy 
(151–200)
Children, asthmatics, and people 
with heart or lung disease should 
reduce exertion outdoors. 
Very Unhealthy 
(201–300)
Children, asthmatics, and people 
with heart or lung disease should 
avoid outdoor exertion. Everyone 
else should reduce exertion 
outdoors. 
Children and adults with asthma who 
are active outdoors are most vulnerable 
to the health effects of sulfur dioxide.
10
Air Quality Index
Where can I get more information? 
For information and resources about air quality, visit the 
AIRNow Web site at www.airnow.gov. There you can:
• Access maps and information on air quality in your area. 
Find out how to protect your health and how to reduce 
air pollution. 
• Sign up for EnviroFlash (www.environflash.info), a free 
service that will alert you via e-mail when air quality in 
your area is forecast to be a concern.
• Download the App to see the air quality for your area on 
your smartphone or tablet.
• Access brochures, movies, games, and other air quality 
educational resources for adults and kids.
• Visit Air Compare (www.epa.gov/aircompare/), where you 
can compare the air quality of U.S. cities and find out 
about air quality trends in your area.
• Access Web cameras that provide real-time pictures of 
visibility at many locations across the United States.
• Access training and tools. If you are a health care 
provider, teacher, or weathercaster, you can use these 
resources to help adults and children understand how air 
pollution affects their health and how they can protect 
their health.
11
