 Okay, I think that we will get started. So first of all, good afternoon everyone. I'm Ellen Loutenberg, a member of the ex-posomics and children's abromail health board at Mount Sinai. I would like to welcome you all to today's presentation. And before we get to Dr. Hadley, I'm just going to give a very brief introduction. This is the second session of this year's lunchtime chats with one of Mount Sinai's world-class environmental medicine experts. I don't want to take too much time away from him, but just give a very brief introduction to say that each week during this series, we will focus on a different aspect of how the environment plays a role in determining our health and well-being. This showcases the latest cutting edge research that we aim to provide some insight and actionable day to day tools to make better health decisions for ourselves and our families. I have personally been involved in a volunteer capacity at Mount Sinai since 2010 and have witnessed firsthand the transformation of the environmental health research program. Mount Sinai continues to attract some of the brightest scientists in this field and our institute offers a multi disciplinary approach to research, education, and clinical care. What is particularly exciting to me is the innovative methods that are being developed today and how they increase the speed of scientific discovery and therefore the possibilities for disease prevention. Today we'll be talking about matters of the heart, literally. Our scientists at the Institute of Exposomics Research are true innovators uncovering new insights that deepen our understanding of the complex relationship between all things in our environment and health outcomes. As we mark American heart month in February, it's worth highlighting that cardiovascular disease remains the leading cause of death globally and in the US accounting from millions of deaths each year with the significant portion of these deaths attributed to environmental factors. Exposure to air pollutants such as particulate matter, nitrogen oxides have been linked to a range of cardiovascular diseases, including heart attacks, stroke and arrhythmias. Today we will delve into the latest research on this important topic exploring the mechanisms by which air pollution damages heart health and discuss the potential implications for the health of future generations. We know that the climate crisis has led to a health crisis with patients grappling with extreme heat, extreme weather events, and the health effects of increased air pollution. The presentation will be about 25 minutes followed by 20 minutes for audience questions. Please submit your questions using Q&A function and if we can't get to them all, we will make sure that they get answered and shared on social media and perhaps in other ways. Dr. Hadley is a clinical cardiologist and environmental health researcher. He earned his medical degree in Masters in Public Health at Harvard University and completed his clinical training at Mount Sinai where he currently holds a joint appointment as assistant professor in the department of medicine as well as environmental medicine and public health. Additionally, he serves as the United States representative to the World Heart Federation Air Pollution Expert Group. Dr. Hadley's research focuses on the cardiovascular effects of environmental exposures. He holds leadership roles in multiple nationally funded studies investigating the health impacts of air pollution in Iran, India and the United States. With years of experience, both in clinical practice and in-depth research, Dr. Hadley is a true expert in this field, offering a unique perspective and valuable insights on the impact of the environment on heart health. So with that, Dr. Hadley, please take it away. Hi, everyone. I hope you can hear me. Thanks so much for the warm introduction and the invitation to speak to all of you. Let me get my slides up here. There we go. Let me let me know if you can't see anything, but I'm going to get started. I'm going to try and cover a lot of ground on just a few minutes here. I've been asked to focus on the impact of air pollution on cardiovascular health. And I'll begin with the discussion of the magnitude of this global problem and then specific air pollutants that lead to heart disease is not the end. Hopefully try to link this back to the practice of medicine and what we can offer our patients to help protect themselves from air pollution. In terms of financial disclosures, I'm a consultant for the World Health Organization on this topic and a few of my slides come from my work with them. So let's just start off with why this topic matters, the global burden of disease. So some numbers. So air pollution exposures right now are estimated to be responsible for about seven million deaths worldwide and the majority of those are from heart disease. About seven billion people are exposed to levels of air pollution above levels recommended by the World Health Organization. And that's approximately 90% of the global population. And then overall that makes air pollution the number four risk factor for global mortality. So you have high blood pressure, diabetes, high cholesterol and then air pollution and then smoking and air pollution is on the rise. And these deaths due to air pollution are expected to double by 2050 and in developing countries that's due largely to this rapid industrialization and burning of fossil fuels. So in the United States exposures are rising rapidly as well, more due to wildfires driven by climate change, particularly on the West coast as you've seen in the news. Here's a comparison between air pollution and some other commonly discussed threats to global health. We talk about all the time and you can see how right now air pollution is a eclipsing AIDS tuberculosis and malaria combined as well as some other risk factors for mortality. Here's a pie chart showing the top five causes of death attributed to air pollution. And this maybe is a bit counterintuitive. I think people find because we inhale air pollution into the lungs. So we think it's going to be lung disease is the main problem. But it's not actually the case. It's number two. Number one is cardiovascular disease, particularly heart attacks and stroke and red there and stroke in orange. And we'll talk about the mechanisms for these in a minute. And when you dive deeper into cardiovascular mortality specifically not just overall mortality, we can see these numbers. So globally there's about three and a half million cardiovascular deaths that's one and five which have been now attributed to air pollution. When you look at severely polluted regions like India and China, it's even higher, maybe as high as one and three cardiovascular deaths. And then in the USA rates are lower, not surprisingly, because we have lower exposure levels where maybe one and 25 cardiovascular deaths are attributable to air pollution. Here in New York, about 1300 people die annually from cardiovascular disease attributed to air pollution. That's about one and 40 of our cardiovascular deaths. So for comparison, a similar number of deaths in New York are due to aortic stenosis, which is a tight heart valve. And that's a problem that we've recently invested. There's enormous resources and solving something of the same scale. Let's talk about where air pollution comes from and how it leaves to cardiovascular disease. So in the United States, there's a few key sources we got to focus on depending on what region you're in. So in big cities like ours, the major source of air pollution is vehicular emissions. So exhaust and break and tire wear. Here's a map. This was also on the title slide that we developed, published in circulation. So now heart attack risk varies based on residents in New York City and the air pollution levels at that location. And you can see that the risk is higher and higher density regions where there's more traffic, there's less circulation through the street canons and also near major roadways like I 95, but you can see snaking through the Bronx there to the north. In non urban settings in the US, other sources are more dominant. So if you look at industrial regions like the rust belt, then major emissions come from coal plants from smelting manufacturing in more rural regions like in an Appalachia, for example, indoor burning of solid fuels for cooking and heating is a major source of exposure. And outside of the United States, particularly in Africa and South Asia, this indoor burning of solid fuels is also very pervasive, very intense, estimated to be responsible for about one third of the global cardiovascular deaths due to air pollution. And lastly, across the US, the fastest growing source is wildfire smoke. And I just want to emphasize the gravity of this wildfire smoke problem, which really is growing worse every year due to climate change. And as you've seen in the news, there are fires here in North America, but also decimated Brazil, Australia, Central Africa. This is a satellite image of the American West in the Pacific during the 2020 fires. So you can see this dense smoke covering an area the size of Western Europe, an area inhabited by tens of millions of people. Smoke from these fires you might recall was detected here in New York in 2020 and in 2021, you could smell it in the air for a few days, darken the skies a little bit, turn the sun red. And this is a scale and intensity of air pollution exposures that we've never seen before in our nation's history on the East Coast. And we expected to only get worse and more frequent, as these exposures can travel thousands miles across national borders, cross oceans. This map shows the expected change in what's called the KV drought index, which is kind of the main predictor of wildfire risk. And so in the United States, we've seen about a fivefold increase in annual areas burned since the 70s. And by this model, we're expecting about 80 million Americans to be exposed to wildfire smoke annually by 2050. Let's talk, let's just shift gears here. Those are the main sources. Let's talk about the components of air pollution. What are the specific components we have to worry about? There's a lot of different kinds of air pollutants. The main ones we think about are particulate matter or PM. There's also this volatile organic carbon compounds, black carbon, gases like ozone carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide. Today, I'm really going to just hone in on particulate matter because that's the pollutant by far the strongest associations with cardiovascular disease. So particulate matter are these microscopic particles of solid or sometimes liquid matter. It's usually a combination of elemental carbon and sulfate and nitrite and complex organic molecules. And we classified into different categories based on size based on what size filter it can pass through. So PM 2.5, which is circled down there is something is a level of particle that could pass through a filter that's 2.5 microns in size. And incidentally, that's the same sizes or red blood cells. So that's the same size as a particle that could complete a circulatory loop through the cardiovascular system through a capillary. And it's this exposure to this PM 2.5 that really has the strongest associations with cardiovascular disease. So just to kind of orient ourselves to different levels of exposure. So these are in micrograms for cubic meter, which is just how we usually measure this stuff in the air. So across the entire US were at about a nine. That's below the WHO recommendation for average annual exposure of 10 New York City were a little above that at about 12. When you look at the recommended daily exposure, that's 20. When you look at the average exposure across all of Asia and it's 4 billion inhabitants, that's already at 35. When you look at the most polluted cities on earth like New Delhi or DACA, these have average annual exposures of about 225, but similar to smoking a few cigarettes every day for every one of the 20 million inhabitants of New Delhi. And then when you look at these wildfire events when they're peaking in Portland, Oregon, for example, the average exposure for all of September 2020 was 250. So even higher than those cities in Asia. Indoor smoking, smoke burning can be even higher because there's if there's limited ventilation, you can be able to 300 or even up to 30,000 was kind of the maximum level that's been recorded. And that's around the range of really active smoking like literally drying in on a cigarette. You might be more familiar with this metric. This is the United States air quality index, which tries to simplify air pollution exposures into these different color coded categories. They assign numbers to different PM 2.5 levels. So you can see like a good AQI in green is given a number between 0 and 50 here, which corresponds to PM 2.5 levels below 12, which is where we are in New York City. And then an unhealthy AQI in red is given a number of 151 to 200 corresponds to level 56 to 150. I kind of wish they'd just stuck with PM 2.5 concentrations instead of creating a separate scale. But it is what it is. So you know, you can see average exposures across Asia, likely discussed would be kind of on the border here between yellow and orange. You know, in the west coast during peak fire season, we're down in that light purple color. It's another map of global exposures and see how it varies usually highest in these countries and southern and eastern Asia. Some high exposures across the Sahara and the Tuklamakhan desert and the Raven Peninsula. That's just from from dust storms, which may impact health, but the evidence is more limited. And close up on exposures in the United States, you can see in Los Angeles and the rust belt, we're getting higher concentrations. It's another figure that shows exposures relative to the population of different countries. You can see that that vertical dotted line AQG of 10, that's that WHO recommendation for annual exposures and you can see how the vast majority of the global population is far above that USA kind of straddles the line. So at this point, you know, we've covered, I think the global burden. I hope I've convinced you that it's pretty significant. I want to kind of change gears and talk more about how air pollution affects cardiovascular health. You know, I'm a researcher so I could go on about the studies published, but I think that's getting too much on the weeds. I just want to show this one study. This is the Harvard six city study, which is the watershed paper in our field. And back in 1993, this was published in the New England Journal of Medicine. So they looked at six different cities. They followed patients in those cities. And monitored their air pollution exposures and look for cardiovascular outcomes controlling for a lot of different factors. So they showed a clear association here that you can see a linear relationship between PM 2.5 exposure and mortality for each of these cities from P for Portage Wisconsin there in the lower left of the graph all the way up to ask for a story of the Ohio using our 1990s graphical rendering systems. And extended follow up of this cohort has now gone on for 35 years and we've seen clear relationships between particularly matter exposures and cardiovascular mortality and and different types of mortality heart failure stroke heart attack, etc. And then there's been numerous other large really well designed prospective cohort studies don't have time to go through these in detail, but they really fleshed out our understanding of the relationship between exposures and all these different cardiovascular diseases. Here at Mount Sinai, I'll just plug that we've kind of thrown our hat in the ring with a cohort of our own. This is the space study. This is an NIH funded project looking at the impact of eight different environmental risk factors, including air pollution on cardiovascular events and it's in this really well characterized cohort. 50,000 individuals that have been followed for over 10 years now in Iran and we're starting to see already this this relationship again between air pollution exposures and cardiovascular and all cause mortality. I'm excited about this study in particular because it's a true ex-posomic study we're really looking at multiple environmental risk factors simultaneously and looking at how they interact with each other to produce health or disease. And as all this evidence has mounted the national boards, the American Heart Association, etc. I started coming out with these consensus documents that you know agree that there is this causal and and modifiable relationship between air pollution exposure and cardiovascular health. So at this point, everyone believes it, you know, the jury's not out anymore. The European Society of Cardiology followed suit in 2015 as well. So let's talk about how this happens. How does air pollution cause heart disease? It's a pretty big topic, but I think it was nicely summarized by this recent paper in the New England Journal. So first air pollution is inhaled and it can act on the lungs and then also enter the systemic circulation, which results in this cascade of inflammation. So if you have chronic exposure to air pollution like this, then you get the development of traditional cardiovascular risk factors, things like high blood pressure, high cholesterol, diabetes, and ultimately the development of atherosclerosis of plaques in the walls of your arteries and potentially also scarring of the heart muscle itself. So in this illustration here, you can kind of see the cross section of that artery developing more and more plaque with more and more air pollution exposure. And then ultimately that plaque can rupture and include the artery. So and if that happens in blood vessels that supply the brain, we call that a stroke. If that happens in the blood vessels that supply the heart, we call that a heart attack. And heart attacks and heart inflammation like this can also cause this scarring of the heart and ultimately a weak pump and heart failure. And long term exposures, there's sort of a long term short term dichotomy as well. So long term exposures can lead to this development of atherosclerosis. But short term exposures can lead to plaque rupture and go from that thick plaque to an actual cardiac event like a heart attack. And this is why people who have atherosclerosis for other reasons like chronic uncontrolled diabetes, you know, may have a cardiac event just with their first air pollution exposure because that air pollution sort of we say harvesting the pre existing plaque. And currently data suggests that the risk of these different cardiac events increases about one to 2% for short term exposures about baseline about 5 to 10% for people who are chronically exposed to to PM 2.5 and that's per 10 micrograms for meter cube. And then the increase is the higher the exposure is also at Mount Sinai we've thrown our head into this fibrosis pathway we're looking at 1100 patients who've had cardiac MRIs looking at where they live and the exposures that they've had in that area and to see if we can find the signature of air pollution on the heart. And we've also seen that there's early work on that but very excited about it. Okay, so kind of trying to bring this home let's talk about what we can do about these exposures. How can we protect patients? This is the topic I really care a lot about. How can we bring exposomics into clinical care. Right now I think there's still kind of two barriers to doing this. There's the risk assessment barrier and there's the intervention barrier. So we can identify the patients that are at risk and then once we found the patients that are risk we need to have evidence based interventions that we can provide. In terms of risk assessment, I don't think this is as foreign as we think we already talk about, you know, smoking diet, et cetera other environmental factors so it's pretty easy. I think to start asking about air pollution exposures. So if we can get a chance to do this, we can get a chance to do this. And then we can also develop the risk assessment map like this, which can tell us about what levels of exposure patients are having based on their home address. So exciting area is how this is moving into personalized medicine. So this isn't an endorsement for any of these products, but just to give you a sense of what's out there. So Apple watch. For example, can can link to these exposure maps and give people a real time estimate of the air pollution levels around them. And these are really popular applications. Like you can see this air quality visual map is like 182,000 positive reviews if you believe it. So also trying to provide education on the risks associated with air pollution and sometimes in misleading ways. It's going to get even more personalized than this because we're also getting sensors that are detecting the air around you rather than linking to a map, detecting the air in your immediate environment, telling you what your exposure is. And certain telecommunications companies have patents for this kind of device. They're not ready for prime time yet, but I don't think it's going to be long until you start seeing these kinds of things integrated into your personal electronic devices. And that has implications for doctors, of course, because you know, we'll have patients coming and talking about what they've seen on their iPhone and wanting the doctor to tell them what they could do about it. And you know, once we know these exposure levels, we can estimate the risk for different patients. I think this is something we're going to start bringing into the electronic medical record. This is something we're doing in Mount Sinai. This is just a pilot image, but the idea here is that the doctor can pull up the patient's own address, plug it into a map, which tells you about all the local environmental risks and help you manage that in real time. And the only thing we can do to decrease these barriers to make it easier to talk about the environment is going to help clinical care. I think I'm going to stop there. I know we're probably talking about interventions a little bit in the in the question and answer section. So I'll turn it back over. Great. Thank you so much, Dr. Hadley. And I, before we get started with the Q&A, we do have some questions that have come in. I wanted to invite the audience to learn a little bit more about how the environment impacts our health by visiting the website. At Mount Sinai Exposomics.org, and there is a slide there for you to take a look at. In the case that you want to explore a little bit more. And if you have any questions, concerns in your own communities, questions about pesticide use in public parks or access to healthy foods, clean water, the scientists from Sinai are available to speak and provide some data that underpin sound policies that promote healthy environments. So please contact us regarding any of those kinds of questions, or if you're interested in having someone come into your community to discuss this. And finally, if you want to get more involved, we are seeking nominations for the Mount Sinai Exposomics and children's environmental health board, a group that supports the work of the Institute. So please feel free to contact us about that. And getting to questions, I know that Dr. Hadley really just showed us a slide about where you get disparities sometimes in neighborhoods and areas such as lower income, that kind of thing. And there are a lot of questions asking about how do you look at that and look to prevent these kinds of inequities in air pollution exposure that are experienced by some of these communities. How would you characterize that? That's a great point. And that's something we see in the US, but also globally where often it's the most marginalized, sociognomically disadvantaged minority communities that are suffering the greatest person burden of air pollution. And there's some historic reasons for that. And you look at red lining, for example, in the co location of like industry and factories with some lower income neighborhoods. So there's a lot of historic precedent. And then you compound that by the fact that oftentimes those disadvantaged groups already have poor health to begin with and may not have the resources to protect themselves to know to get an air purifier, face mask, other interventions we can talk about to protect themselves from air pollution. So all of that definitely compounds. So I think that plays this pressure on the public health care system to focus on those most vulnerable groups and to really direct the majority of the resources towards improving their health, both raising the floor of cardiovascular health in general and then providing more targeted interventions. Those interventions can come both at the individual level in terms of reducing individual exposures, but also in terms of helping with regulation, for example, to lower to lower emissions that affect those populations. Okay, great. Thank you for that. I apologize, but I of course today I have to have which if in going on outside my window. So I might move if it's if it continues. But second question. Is there any research that shows differences in air quality for somebody who lives in cities, who live at different heights, like an apartment on the first floor versus, you know, high up. And I suppose, you know, how often you open your windows and all that. That's a great question. So they, you know, New York actually the New York City government has a set of hundreds of sensors all located all over the city that they used to create their map. But not all of them are street level and you do see variations with elevation. Typically, there's slightly higher levels as you would probably expect lower down. And it gets a little bit better higher, but it's not it's not significant. I kind of take I'd probably in it varies minutes a minute. So I think it's better to kind of look at the, you know, go on EPA website, look at the US, a QI to get a sense of kind of what the average level is. And the York is that's probably many closer to what your average exposure is. It's really hard to say for any one apartment. What your level is. Okay. So also, these so one of the audience members is asking whether masking helps to reduce exposures. This is kind of where the field is right now is testing all of these different interventions to see if they reduce cardiovascular events. As a generalization, we know that interventions like reducing exposure and mice saves lives of mice. We haven't proven it definitively in all cases for heart disease. What we have shown is these mechanistic links where if you put on a face mask, you maybe reduce inflammatory markers in your blood or you reduce your systolic blood pressure, a few points, for example, we don't have the long term data to show that that translates into a benefit. And there's a lot of really exciting randomized trials going on to give us those results. So with that caveat, I will say we don't have the same level of evidence to recommend a face mask as we would for like a stat and lower your cholesterol. But I think we're going to get there. And I do think that the current evidence supports the use of a face mask. If you're a highly susceptible person, I mean, you already have pre-existing cardiovascular disease, particularly after sporosis. And if you're exposed to high levels of air pollution. So if you're someone who has pre-existing heart disease and you're in a wildfire event or you know, you're spending a long time on I 95 and a two hour commute with the wind and convertible, those kinds of things. I would personally recommend a face mask. Okay, and that sort of leads into another question that somebody's asking, which is how one can improve the air quality within their homes. Great. So there's a few different ways to think about this. One is preventing bad air from getting in and then the other is cleaning the air that's already in there. So if you're in an area with with high air pollution, this is more true. And you're seeing this already in the west coast. You need to think about sealing the building envelope, you know, preventing leaks through doors and windows keeping those doors and windows closed when levels are high. And then ideally have a clean air space in your house, like one or two designated rooms where you tend to spend a lot of time like the like a bedroom, where you can put a portable air cleaner. And those have been shown to significantly reduce the air pollution levels indoors and have translated into these kind of free clinical cardiovascular benefits. If you if you're in a building with an HVAC system, mechanical ventilation, just make sure that there's a high arrest in this particular filter, you can really find filter that's, you know, cleaned and changed regularly to filter out air pollution for the whole building. And then we can see something that we focus a lot on hospitals. Okay. So in terms of, you know, looking at multiple environmental exposures together over the course of a lifetime, for example, using different types of data and NASA satellites. If I was so special and most of it was massive and all in terms of the things that would be more limited, whatever that might work are, you know, looking upside down to try to think about how that happens and radius up the overall data, how do they impact the entire systems. And you know, we'll write down a little bit later, content that using the Budget Pathetic Simulator. You know how this type of progress going into testing is very important. So in terms of ancient options, it's really important to engage the formula,way things are going to be part of fizeray. More interesting, more interesting, you know, better belief, so for example, we go to about 50 degrees. And so there's a few areas, going to ref吉, you have to sell some concealed firefighter files, because number one is a full, big area. risks, for example, things that disturb your sleep, like light at night, for example, or temperature, chronic loud noise exposure, which is something we deal with in ICUs, dietary exposures, overnutrition, exposure to metals, like lead and mercury, etc. All of these things drive this common pathway of inflammation and cardiovascular disease. And climate change is just going to exacerbate this and make it even more complicated. So we're going to see heavier precipitation and runoff, which increases contamination of our water and food supplies with heavy metals. We're seeing a loss of biodiversity and loss of traditional diets across the world, leading to the adoption of these, you know, really high caloric imported foods. We're seeing extreme weather events causing mass migration, disrupting access to care. Hospitals are getting overwhelmed by emergency services and don't have the capacity to care for chronic diseases, like heart disease. So, you know, with climate change, the environment is really moving, I think, front and center, and to really becoming the major public health issue at this century. And ex-posomics really helps us understand that, helps us understand who is at risk and how to help. You mentioned the NASA satellites. One way we can look at some of these environmental risk factors. But we're also, you know, here in all sort of developing new methodologies, new statistics to kind of unpack these extremely complicated causal networks that connect the environment to the disease, understand what's causing what's confound in what relationship, and understand what the key pressure points really are to intervene. So I think it's an exciting time. Okay, great. So the next two questions, I'm going to put them out there together because they're maybe related. But so somebody was asking about the guest stove so recently been in the news. So perhaps you have a comment about that. And someone was asking if there are interventions to reverse health effects of air pollution. So I would, so I'm throwing them out together because maybe you can sort of look at that as a kind of one. Yeah, so guest stoves do increase your PM 2.5 levels. And I mean, I don't really mean the clean gas, the natural gas that most of us burn in our households here. But propane stoves, for example, definitely do. What was the second part of the question? So about whether there are interventions that we can do to reverse the health effects of air pollution. Right. So, right. So there appear to be interventions that reverse atherosclerosis in general. So in some people, taking a statin, for example, and really getting your cholesterol levels as low as possible have been shown to shrink back those plaques or help those plaques turn from the kind of rupture into a kind that's calcified and less likely to rupture. So no guarantee that you're someone who's going to respond to that type of therapy. For most people, I think what we're hoping for is just to halt any further progression, which we're getting pretty good at doing with medication and preventing these kinds of environmental exposures. But I think we should work with your doctor to do whatever you can to decrease your risk profile. And if you get it low enough, you may see some regression of that burden of atherosclerosis. Got it. So just to clarify your response about the gasto, you were talking about more propane you said versus natural gas, is that the tension that you were making? Right. So to my knowledge, you know, burning the gas that we burn, that we get piped into our houses here in the city, there's very mild elevations in harmful pollutants in your kitchen from burning that. You probably would have much higher levels actually if you burn your bacon or whatever you're cooking, you know, just that amount of smoke can be harmful. So we had recommended ventilated into cooking something that's smoky, but the combustion of the gas itself at very high temperatures is pretty clean. There's that type of natural gas is not the type of gas that's used in a lot of places in the world. They're really more on contaminated gases, propane, etc. And that has shown a strong association with pollution exposures and cardiovascular disease to the point that a lot of these, a lot of lower and building countries in the programs they have to reduce household air pollution are trying to provide clean burning stoves rather than unclean gas or solid fuel stoves. Got it. Okay. And then someone was asking if how you would cancel people who are cyclists in terms of their exposures. Great question. And this is an area of really, you know, a debate right now because there's a risk benefit. There's a benefit of exercising outdoors, but what's the risk of being exposed? So right now, the community is kind of aligned on this concentration of 100 being the cutoff where the harms of exercising outdoors outweigh the benefits of exercise. So if your PM 2.5 level outside is 100 or higher or in particular, if you're, if you have preexisting heart disease, I would recommend exercising indoors, you know, find a gem, walk around and mall, etc. And of course, it's going to be a continuum. There's not a hard cutoff, but as the levels increase, there's a transition from benefit to risk. Okay. So what are some of the things that you are most excited about when you think about, you know, the next five or 10 years, I know you've already talked a little bit about, you know, some of the things that are going on now, what you anticipate, but I don't know if they're additional things that you can add to that looking a little further down the road. Yeah. I think in the next five to 10 years, you know, we've got, we've got a few trials right now. There's probably a dozen globally that are testing these interventions like face masks, like household air cleaners, even cardiac protective medications that reduce inflammation, are all being tested in randomized trials, looking at hard end points, cardiovascular disease. And we're going to start seeing the results come out soon. And what I'm excited about is what that's going to mean for clinical practice because once there's evidence that this, these interventions save lives, then you get it in the guidelines of the medical societies, then it becomes important to be part of clinical practice. Then you get insurance providers, at least being under pressure to reimburse for things like face masks or household air pollution systems, etc. And I think it's the first step in bringing the environment into the clinic. Air pollution has the most evidence among the different environmental risk factors for heart disease. But once we bring air pollution in, with that scaffolding is there to bring in other risk factors, like heavy metals, etc. That's other things that we've talked about. And I think that that leads us to this end point of a really comprehensive view of health. We're not just focused on the individual, but we're focused on the individual and the environment. Okay. In terms of, you know, again, you know, some of these things have been addressed to a degree, but is there anything else that you would add about community-wide health interventions? You know, I mean, then you get into, you know, policy things like that to reduce risk or protect cardiovascular health. Yeah. I think it's easy as a doctor to talk about the individual doctor patient interventions, but historically, it's really the community-wide interventions that have made the biggest difference. It's the government level of regulations that have cut emissions, for example, that have really made the difference. Well, in terms of health and in terms of economic impact, like to clean the U.S. Clean Air Act from decades ago, it's estimated to have about 30 times return on the economic gains from improved productivity and decreased poor health outcomes. So these government level regulations are very important. We're pretty good in the U.S. We're not as good as some other countries across the Atlantic, but we're certainly better than a lot of these low and middle income countries that have a long way to go. There's things that I think need to be done. You know, you look at smoking, mass media campaigns have been very effective there, and educating the public, empowering people to take this issue into their own hands and protect themselves. I think that's an important step. And even health systems like ours, I think, can start to outreach into the communities, into vulnerable sub-populations with education, with intervention. Okay, so we're pretty much winding down. I don't know if anybody else has anything else to add, but if you have any sort of less things that you would like to add about what people can do in their day to day lives that you haven't already mentioned, I know you mentioned a number of things. Yeah, I think the first step is just awareness. So I would encourage everybody, it's very easy to just get a daily update on your air pollution exposures. You can ask Alexa to do it for you. You can have your iPhones and you in alert, and just be conscious. And you'll see it's just a matter of time until that smoke from California travels over here, and we're really at an unhealthy level. And I don't think you want to be trying to figure out what to do the data that happens. When next fire season, next summer, think about what you would, if you're someone particularly at high risk, think about how you would plan your day for a few days that were really smokey. Maybe you should stock up on toilet paper and prescription medications and things so you don't have to go outside. Maybe you want to have a face mask around that you can, you know, in your car or something that you can wear. I think just those first steps of awareness are important. If you're someone who's really at risk and really, you know, spends a lot of time in an area with really high pollution, then you need to think more about ensuring that you have a clean air space indoors and that you're filtering your indoor air. Right. Okay. Well, thank you so much for so much great and exciting information. It's terrific research and a lot of great tips for all of us. And so thank you for that. And before we close, we'd love to ask the audience to complete an evaluation that is in the link in the chat. And I think you will, I don't know whether you'll receive it, you know, after the, after this, this session, but please, you know, it would be great to provide your evaluation. I hope that you will join us next Wednesday for a talk with Dr. Ryan Walker about nutrition and got microbiome, another very important topic. And just look for, you know, register for the full series of webinars. So you can take advantage of some of this amazing research. And thank you for joining us and enjoy the rest of your day.