Air Quality Guide for Nitrogen Dioxide
Air Quality Index
Protect Your Health Near Roadways
Good
(0-50) 
No health impacts are expected when air quality is in this range.
Moderate
(51-100) 
Individuals who are unusually sensitive to nitrogen dioxide 
should consider limiting prolonged outdoor exertion.
Unhealthy for Sensitive Groups
(101-150)
The following groups should limit prolonged outdoor exertion: 
• People with lung disease, such as asthma 
• Children and older adults
Unhealthy
(151-200)
The following groups should avoid prolonged outdoor exertion: 
• People with lung disease, such as asthma 
• Children and older adults 
Everyone else should limit prolonged outdoor exertion.
Very Unhealthy 
(201-300) 
The following groups should avoid all outdoor exertion: 
• People with lung disease, such as asthma 
• Children and older adults 
Everyone else should limit outdoor exertion.
What You Should Know About Nitrogen Dioxide and Your Health
•	
Nitrogen dioxide comes from vehicles, power plants, industrial emissions and off-road sources such as 
construction, lawn and gardening equipment.  All of these sources burn fossil fuels.
•	
People who live or work near busy roadways can experience high exposures.
•	
Find out more about air quality through TV, radio, newspapers,  AIRNow (www.airnow.gov) and 
EnviroFlash (www.enviroflash.info), so you can take steps to protect your health.
Revisions to the National Ambient Air 
Quality Standards for Nitrogen Dioxide
On January 22, 2010, EPA strengthened the health-
based National Ambient Air Quality Standard 
(NAAQS) for nitrogen dioxide (NO2).  EPA set a 
1-hour NO2 standard at the level of 100 parts per 
billion (ppb).  EPA also retained the annual average 
NO2 standard of 53 ppb.  
The 1-hour standard will protect public health by 
limiting people’s exposures to short-term peak 
concentrations of NO2 – which primarily occur near 
major roads.  Community-wide NO2 concentrations 
will be limited to levels below those that have been 
linked to respiratory-related emergency room visits 
and hospital admissions. 
    
Additionally, EPA established ambient air monitoring 
and reporting requirements for NO2. In urban 
areas, monitors are required near major roads and 
in other locations where maximum concentrations 
are expected.  EPA has placed a number of monitors 
in locations to help protect communities that are 
susceptible to NO2-related health effects.  
What is nitrogen dioxide and where does it 
come from?
EPA’s NAAQS for NO2 is designed to protect against 
exposure to the entire group of nitrogen oxides 
(NOx).  NO2 is the component of greatest concern 
and is used as the indicator for the larger group 
of NOx.  The sum of nitric oxide (NO) and NO2 
is commonly called NOx.  Other nitrogen oxides 
include nitrous acid and nitric acid.  NOx reacts with 
volatile organic compounds to form ozone. 
 
NO2 forms from ground-level emissions related to 
the burning of fossil fuels from vehicles, power plants, 
industrial sources, and off-road equipment, such as 
construction vehicles and lawn and garden equipment. 
 
In addition to contributing to ground-level ozone 
formation, NO2 is linked with a number of adverse 
effects on the respiratory system. NOx reacts with 
ammonia, moisture, and other compounds to form 
small particles.  These small particles can penetrate 
deeply into sensitive parts of the lungs. 	
How does nitrogen dioxide affect health?
Scientific evidence links short-term NO2 exposures, 
ranging from 30 minutes to 24 hours, with adverse 
respiratory effects including airway inflammation in 
healthy people and increased respiratory symptoms in 
people with asthma. 
Studies also show a connection between short-term 
exposure and increased emergency room visits and 
hospital admissions for respiratory illnesses.
   
Who is sensitive to nitrogen dioxide? 
Individuals who spend time on or near major roads 
can experience NO2 exposures considerably higher 
than occur away from roads.   These exposures are of 
particular concern for sensitive groups, such as people 
with lung disease including asthma, children and older 
adults.
Does my community have unhealthy NO2 levels?
Unlike ozone and particle pollution, which can be 
of concern over large regions, NO2 levels are 
appreciably higher in close proximity to pollution 
sources (e.g., vehicles on major freeways, factories).  
Health effects associated with NO2 are much less 
likely farther away from these pollution sources.
NO2 in heavy traffic or on freeways can be two times 
as high as levels measured in residential areas or on 
lesser traveled roads.  Monitoring studies have shown 
that within approximately 50 meters of heavy traffic/
freeways, NO2 concentrations may be 30 to 100 
percent higher.
What You Can Do T
o Reduce NO2 Emissions
•	
Carpool or use public transportation.
•	
When air quality is healthy, bike or walk instead of driving. 
•	
Combine errands to reduce vehicle trips. 
•	
Limit engine idling. 
•	
When refueling, avoid spilling fuel.  Tighten gas cap securely.
•	
Keep your car, boat, and other engines tuned up. 
•	
Inflate car tires to the recommended pressure. 
•	
Conserve energy at home and at work.
Office of Air and Radiation (6301A)
EPA-456/F-11-003
www.airnow.gov
February 2011
