Air Quality Guide for Particle Pollution 
Harmful particle pollution is one of our nation’s most common air pollutants. Use the chart below to help reduce your 
exposure and protect your health. Visit AirNow.gov for your local air quality forecast (www.airnow.gov). 
Air Quality 
Index 
Who Needs to 
be Concerned? 
What Should I Do? 
Good 
(0-50) 
   It’s a great day to be active outside. 
Moderate 
(51-100) 
Some people who may be 
unusually sensitive to particle 
pollution. 
Unusually sensitive people: Consider making outdoor 
activities shorter and less intense. Watch for symptoms 
such as coughing or shortness of breath. These are signs to 
take it easier. 
Everyone else: It’s a good day to be active outside. 
Unhealthy for 
Sensitive Groups 
(101-150) 
Sensitive groups include people 
with heart or lung disease, older 
adults, children and teenagers, 
pregnant people, minority 
populations, and outdoor 
workers. 
Sensitive groups: Make outdoor activities shorter and less 
intense. It’s OK to be active outdoors, but take more 
breaks. Watch for symptoms such as coughing or 
shortness of breath. 
People with asthma: Follow your asthma action plan and 
keep quick relief medicine handy. 
People with heart disease: Symptoms such as 
palpitations, shortness of breath, or unusual fatigue may 
indicate a serious problem. If you have any of these, 
contact your health care provider. 
Unhealthy 
 (151-200) 
Everyone 
Sensitive groups: Avoid long or intense outdoor activities. 
Consider rescheduling or moving activities indoors.* 
Everyone else: Reduce long or intense activities. Take 
more breaks during outdoor activities. 
Very Unhealthy 
(201-300) 
Everyone 
Sensitive groups: Avoid all physical activity outdoors. 
Reschedule to a time when air quality is better or move 
activities indoors.* 
Everyone else: Avoid long or intense activities. Consider 
rescheduling or moving activities indoors.* 
Hazardous 
(301-500) 
Everyone 
Everyone: Avoid all physical activity outdoors. 
Sensitive groups: Remain indoors and keep activity levels 
low. Follow tips for keeping particle levels low indoors.* 
*Note: If you don't have an air conditioner, staying inside with the windows closed may be dangerous in extremely hot
weather. If you are hot, go someplace with air conditioning or check with your local government to find out if cooling
centers are available in your community.
What is particle pollution? 
Particle pollution comes from many different sources. Fine 
particles (2.5 micrometers in diameter and smaller) come 
from power plants, industrial processes, vehicle tailpipes, 
woodstoves, and wildfires. Coarse particles (between 2.5 
and 10 micrometers) come from crushing and grinding 
operations, road dust, and some agricultural operations. 
Why is particle pollution a problem? 
Particle pollution causes a number of serious health 
problems, including coughing, wheezing, reduced lung 
function, asthma attacks, heart attacks and strokes. It also 
is linked to early death in people with heart or lung disease. 
Do I need to be concerned? 
It’s always smart to pay attention to your air quality, but it’s 
especially true for people who may be at greater risk. They 
include: 
•
People with heart disease.
•
People with lung disease, including asthma and Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD).
•
Older adults.
•
Children and teenagers because their lungs are still
developing, and they breathe more air per pound of
body weight than adults.
•
Pregnant people.
•
Minority populations.
•
Outdoor workers.
How can I protect myself? 
Use AQI forecasts, available on AirNow.gov to plan outdoor 
activities. On days when the AQI is forecast to be unhealthy, 
check AirNow for your current air quality and take simple 
steps to reduce your exposure, including: 
•
Choose a less intense activity.
•
Shorten your outdoor activities.
•
Reschedule activities.
•
Exercise away from busy roads.
When particle levels are high outdoors, they can be high 
indoors too. 
Keep particles lower indoors: 
•
Reduce your use of fireplaces and wood stoves. And
don’t use candles or smoke indoors.
•
Use HEPA air filters (https://www.epa.gov/indoor-air-
quality-iaq) in your HVAC system.
•
Buy or make your own portable air cleaner designed
to reduce particles indoors.
Can I help reduce particle pollution? 
Yes! Here are a few tips. 
•
Drive less: bike or walk, carpool, use public
transportation.
•
Use energy efficiently; choose ENERGY STAR certified
products.
•
For cleaner heat, upgrade to a heat pump, electric
heat, or ductless heat pumps.
•
Keep car, boat and other engines tuned.
•
If you use wood for heat, burn it efficiently. Check
EPA’s Burn Wise Program for tips
(www.epa.gov/burnwise).
•
Don’t burn leaves, garbage, plastic or rubber.
Office of Air Quality and Radiation 
EPA-452/F-23-002 
www.airnow.gov  
February 2023 
Key Facts to Know About Particle Pollution: 
•
Particle pollution can cause serious health problems, including asthma attacks, heart attacks, strokes and early death.
•
Particle pollution can be a problem at any time of the year, depending on where you live.
•
You can reduce your exposure to ozone pollution and still get exercise! Use AirNow’s (www.airnow.gov) current Air
Quality Index (AQI) information and forecasts to plan your outdoor activities.
