Skip directly to site contentSkip directly to page options
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People
Climate and Health
CDC
Climate and Health
Climate Effects on Health
Air Pollution
Print
Girl (7-9) using inhaler, outdoors - Air Pollution
Climate change is projected to harm human health by increasing ground-level ozone and/or particulate matter air pollution in some locations. Ground-level ozone (a key component of smog) is associated with many health problems, such as diminished lung function, increased hospital admissions and emergency room visits for asthma, and increases in premature deaths.

Factors that affect ozone formation include heat, concentrations of precursor chemicals, and methane emissions. Particulate matter concentrations are affected by wildfire emissions and air stagnation episodes, among other factors. By increasing these different factors, climate change is projected to lead to increased concentrations of ozone and particulate matter in some regions. Increases in global temperatures could cause associated increases in premature deaths related to worsened ozone and particle pollution.

Estimates that assume no change in regulatory controls or population characteristics have ranged from 1,000 to 4,300 additional premature deaths nationally per year by 2050 from combined ozone and particle health effects. Less certainty exists about the responses of airborne particles to climate change than the response of ozone. Health-related costs of the current effects of ozone air pollution exceeding national standards have been estimated at $6.5 billion (in 2008 U.S. dollars) nationwide, based on a U.S. assessment of health impacts from ozone levels during 2000–2002.

Watch a short video about air quality changes, and learn what communities can do to prepare.

CDC Air Pollution Resources:
Air Quality – information and resources on air pollutants, particle pollution, and other relevant topics
Asthma – guidance on asthma symptoms, triggers, and management
Air Quality and Asthma Data – Tracking Portal – interactive maps, tables, and charts
Climate Change Decreases the Quality of the Air We Breathe pdf icon[PDF – 110 KB]
Page last reviewed: December 21, 2020
Content source: National Center for Environmental Health
Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Syndicate
home
Climate and Health
Climate Effects on Health
plus icon
Air Pollution
Allergens
plus icon
Wildfires
Temperature Extremes
Precipitation Extremes
Diseases Carried by Vectors
Food and Waterborne Diarrheal Disease
Food Security
Mental Health and Stress-Related Disorders
Regional Health Effects
plus icon
Climate-Ready States & Cities Initiative
plus icon
BRACE Framework
What's New
Resources
plus icon
Core Functions
Publications
Policy
Partners
About CDC
Contact Us
800-232-4636
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
LinkedIn
Youtube
Pinterest
Snapchat
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
Accessibility
External Links
Privacy
Policies
No Fear Act
FOIA
Nondiscrimination
OIG
Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
USA.gov