 You've seen our research on social media. Now join us as we dive deeper into the public health topics of our time, featuring new studies and findings generated by our faculty and researchers committed to advancing health equity. From the Department of Population and Public Health Sciences at Keck School of Medicine of USC, this is Preventive Pros, the podcast. Hello, I'm Carrie Breton, professor of Environmental Health in the Department of Population and Public Health Sciences and co-director of our Modre's Environmental Health Disparity Center. And my name is Zhongjiang Tien Chen-Yu. I'm a postdoc in the Department of Population and Public Health Sciences. And my research is really focused on looking at environmental exposures enduring pregnancy and their effects on child health outcomes. My research interests are early life environment to exposures and maternal and the child health. We were really interested in understanding how air pollution might affect pregnancy outcomes and particularly when you think about stressors that can be experienced in pregnancy. So this was really a study looking at whether stress can interact with air pollution and how that might affect baby's health. We conducted this research having several purposes. We first want to know, as Carrie mentioned, how does psychological stress and other stressors may interact with air pollution to have a worse effect on the baby? We are focusing on birth weight because birth weight is a proxy for fetal development which itself sets the foundation for the baby's future health. And there are studies that are showing birth weight is associated with future health in the offspring. Secondly, we are also very interested to know when is the sensitive window at that time air pollution exposure may have stronger effects on the fetal development of the women's house. We hope to know this sensitive window so we can more effectively protect women during this period to protect the baby. So we found a couple of things in conducting this research. One is that we identified the beginning of pregnancy as being a vulnerable period of pregnancy, particularly when looking at air pollution exposures. We also found that women who are experiencing the greatest levels of stress during their pregnancy are also the same women who are the most vulnerable to the effects, the negative effects of air pollution exposure on their baby's birth weight. Our findings indicate that women who are experiencing psychological stress may be more vulnerable to the effect of air pollution on the baby's weight. So this is really a calling to allocate more resources to protect this low income Hispanic women who are already at high levels of different exposures and also experiencing psychological stress. So protecting them and protecting the next generation. Yes, we're studying his mind population, but there's a double whammy here. They've got greater exposures, they've got greater stressors, you know, and as a society, we really need to be addressing this multifaceted issue. LA's done a good job of lowering air pollution. There's no doubt that we've had improvements on our ambient air quality, but there's still these complexities and disparities in exposure that exist, you know, structurally. And we could do a lot more, I think, too, at the individual level to help all pregnant women manage stress and addressed stressors in their lives. And that might be one small thing that can help. In the bigger picture, we're really interested in looking at all sorts of environmental exposures and how these exposures might affect pregnant women and they're developing babies. In the Modular Center, what we're really trying to do is look at combinations of exposures and try to dig a little deeper into some of these complexities and these combinations of exposures might be combinations of stressors, like psychosocial stressors and environmental toxicants, like in this particular resource that we've been talking about. But it may also be larger combinations of environmental pollutants, chemicals, pesticides, metals that people are exposed to and they don't even know it from many different sources. So I think that that's one of one of the main goals of our centers, really to try to get a handle on a variety of exposures that women are facing and then provide a body of evidence to help us reduce or eliminate these exposures with the end goal of really trying to promote the healthiest pregnancy as possible and minimize disease risk for children. We are looking at multiple environmental pollution, how that may affect some biological mechanisms of aging. Even though it's really early, we measure aging biomarkers at birth, but life is a continuum. So if we find evidence that pollution and other environmental stressors affect the biological aging at very early of life, probably that's why those early life environmental exposure increased the risk of diseases in later life. So we are decipher this secret of how the human house developed over time and how the environment affect that. So in hope we can find a solution to reverse the other worst effect. Preventive Pros, the podcast is produced by the Department of Population and Public Health Sciences at Keck School of Medicine of USC. To learn more about any of our episodes, or to subscribe to our monthly Preventive Dose newsletter featuring the latest in public health research and news, visit pps.usc.edu-forwardslash-podcast. Thank you for listening.