 My name is Pamela Let's See from the University of Minnesota. And I'm one of the chairs of this year's A.J. of the Lifestyle Meeting. This morning we had an opening session entitled Green World Heart Healthy Living. Dr. Sanjay Rajagokulan from University Hospitals, Case Western University, Case Western Reserve University, gave a talk entitled Air Pollution and Climate Change, Convergent Solutions for Sustainable Cardiovascular Health. Dr. Rajagokulan, could you please share insights you have about the relationship between air pollution and cardiovascular health? Thank you so much Dr. Let's See in such a pleasure to be at this session and to be able to talk about this very important opening session. And again, thank you for the opportunity to be given the privilege of presenting. So my talk really explored the connections between air pollution and a growing existential crisis, climate change, a provided data supporting the consequences of air pollution, especially towards cardiovascular events. Air pollution many of the audience may not even recognize it for that matter. Many health professionals have not recognized an important association between air pollution and mortality, primarily to cardiovascular mechanisms. And the solutions for air pollution are convergent with those of climate change, which we all agree is a major problem facing humanity. The same anthropogenic emissions, fossil fuel emissions, a contributory evolution, also contribute to climate change. And therefore, the solutions that might address air pollution might also start to address problems related to climate change. So I also provide towards the end of my talk what society and individuals can do to protect themselves against the harmful effects of air pollution and sort of touch upon some of the aspects that we could do as a society to avert not only air pollution related health consequences, but also air pollution emissions related climate change. Would you mind also sharing what can individuals do to protect themselves from air pollution? I think that's a great question because we all know that fossil fuel emissions are not going away any time soon. Our society is still very dependent on fossil fuel sources for really sustaining society. And it's going to be several decades before we see the end formally of the era of society that was built civilization, built in fossil fuel. So in the interim, there is going to be the problem with air pollution. And there is going to be the challenge as to how individuals can protect themselves from the health consequences. And as I mentioned earlier, the primary notice operandi of fossil fuel emissions or air pollution mediated health consequences is cardiovascular. So what are the personal things and what can do? Well, the first thing is to identify individuals who are susceptible or so-called individuals who are over-desensitive to the effects of air pollution. Those include individuals that you and I know are high risk from a cardiovascular perspective. Individuals of existing pre-existing cardiovascular conditions, pre-existing cardio pulmonary conditions, cardiovascular conditions, type 2 diabetes, the elderly, the infum individuals are immunosuppressed or with organ transplants. All these individuals are at high risk for effects at a universal air pollution. So in order to mitigate the consequences, one of the nice things, I guess the similar lining of an otherwise dark cloud of COVID-19 is that people are wearing N95 masks. And N95 masks are well known to reduce exposure to the most, I guess, injurious component of air pollution, which is a particulate matter less than 2.5 micron component. So the N95 masks are an excellent solution not to leave a COVID-19, but to protect yourself against exposure to PM2.5. Other mechanisms, other means also may include usage of air conditioning, reducing exposure to ambient sources of air pollution, particularly important in segments of society or areas of the country exposed to wildfires, which, for you know, is particularly prevalent in the West Coast and the Mountain States. So that's something that you could do is to ensure that you have air filtration systems both indoor. They work quite well, as well as air conditioning systems. You know, if you happen to own an automobile, it might be good. If you happen to be susceptible to avoid areas associated with high pollution. So, you know, being being clued in to the alerts from your local city regarding air pollution levels being hazardous might be a good way to pay attention and avoid crowded areas, which are heavily polluted or high concentrations of emissions from trucks and automobiles might be a good idea. Taking alternate routes might be another. So there are a number of things that we could we could take to protect ourselves. But again, this is in concern with warnings, you know, from your local authorities regarding days that are particularly hazardous, you know, to higher pollution levels. Those are some very practical ideas to reduce risk. Thank you very much Pam and look forward to learning more in this very interesting conference.