 What is air pollution? Well, it's a contamination of the quality of our air. Usually it's used to refer to chemical contaminants, but there are actually other agents as well that can be considered pollutants. And the US EPA regulates the quality of air in two different ways. There are the so-called criteria air pollutants, and that's what I'm going to talk about today. These include ozone, nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide, particulate matter, carbon dioxide, and lead. And I'm only really going to talk about ozone, nitrogen dioxide, and particulate matter, and how they impact asthma. There's a whole separate class of air pollutants called hazardous air pollutants that are regulated at the source, factories that emit these hazardous air pollutants that are primarily either reproductive or carcinogenic toxicants. They are regulated, again, at the source, so a company that produces these would have to get a permit to be able to emit them. But because they are related to reproductive and cancer risk, I'm not going to talk about them today. I'm going to talk about asthma. So there's a lot of research with regard to outdoor air pollution and asthma, and I'm only going to be summarizing a few studies. And with regard to exacerbations of childhood asthma, there are a number of studies that show that ozone, particulate matter, and nitrogen dioxide are three pollutants that are very important with regard to causing exacerbations of asthma. And the studies have included those that show increased symptoms, increased wheezing, increased cough, increased shortness of breath, with air pollutant episodes, air pollution episodes. And then there are those that have shown changes on lung function, and increased use of anti-asma medications, bronchodilators, and those that show increased healthcare utilization, either ER visits or hospitalizations. And perhaps my favorite study in this regard was done in Atlanta during the 1996 Olympics. And in order to prevent traffic gridlock, the city of Atlanta encouraged people to have flexible work hours. So basically they got rid of rush hour. And by getting rid of rush hour, they decreased the precursors for afternoon pollution, primarily precursors for ozone. But particulate matter and nitrogen dioxide levels also went down. So on this slide, we're showing on the way access healthcare utilization visits to emergency rooms, hospitalizations, et cetera. And the dark blue purple bars are the pre-Elimpics levels of utilization in a Medicaid database, HMO database, and the Georgia hospital discharge database. And the teal bars are for the same databases during the Olympic period. And you can see there was a marked decrease in asthma healthcare utilization during the Olympics. And I'm not showing the data, but it correlates well with decreases in air pollution, particularly ozone. Now, while there's a lot of data to support air pollution exacerbating asthma, causing asthma, there's much less data. But there are two studies I want to share with you. So they're both from the Southern California Children's Health Study, which was a large study in 12 communities in Southern California. And these communities were selected to have different levels of air pollution. There were places along the coast with not very much ozone exposure, places farther east up against the mountains to the east of LA where there was a lot of ozone exposure. And there were some places where it was clean all together up in Ventura County, for example. And the first study that I want to point out to you, which is in the top bullet, is a study where the investigators showed that there was an increased risk of new onset asthma in this large population-based study that had over 4,000 kids. There was a 3.3 times higher risk of developing asthma in kids who played three or more outdoor sports. Now, why is that? Well, when you're outdoors, you're going to get exposed to more ozone. Ozone doesn't penetrate very well indoors. And when you're playing sports, you're increasing your rate of breathing, increasing your ventilation so you get a heavier dose. So it was really only the kids that played outside a lot that had the increased risk for asthma in this study. But it was one of the first studies that showed that air pollution could play a role in causing asthma. Now, a few years later from the same study, they also showed that there was about a 50% increase risk of new onset asthma if you live near a major roadway. Either live near a major roadway or went to school near a major roadway. And a few had both. There would even be a greater increased risk. So, if you live near a major roadway or went to school near a major roadway or went to school near a major roadway, you're going to get exposed to more ozone.