Skip to main content
U.S. flag
An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know
Search
Search EPA.gov

Environmental Topics
Laws & Regulations
Report a Violation
About EPA
Indoor Air Quality (IAQ)
CONTACT US
Air Cleaners and Air Filters in the Home
Related Topics
Frequently Asked Questions About Air Cleaners
Should You Have the Air Ducts in Your Home Cleaned?
Pesticide Devices: A Guide for Consumers
Related Publications
New Guidance for Residential Air Cleaners
ASHRAE Journal Sep 2019
by: Harriman, Stephens, and Brennan

Used with permission from the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) Journal. This article may not be copied nor distributed in either paper or digital form without ASHRAE’s permission. For more information about ASHRAE, visit www.ashrae.org.

Información disponible en español

The most effective ways to improve your indoor air are to reduce or remove the sources of pollutants and to ventilate with clean outdoor air. In addition, research shows that filtration can be an effective supplement to source control and ventilation. Using a portable air cleaner and/or upgrading the air filter in your furnace or central heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning (HVAC) system can help to improve indoor air quality. Portable air cleaners, also known as air purifiers or air sanitizers, are designed to filter the air in a single room or area. Central furnace or HVAC filters are designed to filter air throughout a home. Portable air cleaners and HVAC filters can reduce indoor air pollution; however, they cannot remove all pollutants from the air.

The following publications provide information on portable air cleaners and on HVAC and furnace filters commonly used in homes.

Guide to Air Cleaners in the Home
2nd edition, August 2018
Portable Air Cleaners, Furnace and HVAC Filters
Available in HTML format and PDF format.

Cover to Guide to Air Cleaners in the Home
The short consumer guide covers portable air cleaners and furnace or HVAC filters used in a home. It includes tips for selecting a portable air cleaner, furnace filter, or HVAC filter.

Click on the images below to see an animation of a portable air cleaner removing particles from the air in a home. 

image of an air cleaner in a large room
Air cleaner removing particles in a large room

image of an air cleaner in a small room
Air cleaner removing particles in a small room

For an overview of the Guide to Air Cleaners in the Home:

View the technical assistance webinar Dealing with Dust in the Wind: EPA Guidance for Consumers About Air Cleaners presented by Terry Brennan (Camroden Associates) and Lew Harriman (Mason-Grant Consulting) on the EPA YouTube channel.

Residential Air Cleaners: A Technical Summary
3rd edition, August 2018
Portable Air Cleaners, Furnace and HVAC Filters
Available in PDF format.

Cover of air cleaner technical summary
The longer technical guide focuses on air cleaners for residential use; it does not address air cleaners used in large or commercial structures such as office buildings, schools, large apartment buildings, or public buildings. In addition to providing general information about the types of pollutants affected by air cleaners, this document discusses the types of air-cleaning devices and technologies available, metrics that can be used to compare air-cleaning devices, the effectiveness of air-cleaning devices in removing indoor air pollutants, and information from intervention studies on the effects that air cleaners can have on health and on health markers.

For an overview of Residential Air Cleaners: A Technical Summary:

View the technical assistance webinar The Technical Details: EPA Guidance for Residential Air Cleaners presented by Terry Brennan (Camroden Associates) and Lew Harriman (Mason-Grant Consulting) on the EPA YouTube channel.

Indoor Air Quality Home
Learn about Indoor Air Quality
Introduction to IAQ
Air Cleaners and Filters
IAQ Science & Technology
Emergencies and IAQ
Indoor Air Pollutants and Sources
IAQ by Building Type
Network and Collaborate
Popular IAQ Topics
Frequently Asked Questions
Publications
Regional and State IAQ Information
Webinars, Meetings & Updates
Contact Us to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.
LAST UPDATED ON OCTOBER 31, 2023
United States Environmental Protection Agency
Discover.
Accessibility Statement
Budget & Performance
Contracting
EPA www Web Snapshot
Grants
No FEAR Act Data
Plain Writing
Privacy
Privacy and Security Notice
Connect.
Data
Inspector General
Jobs
Newsroom
Regulations.gov
Subscribe
USA.gov
White House
Ask.
Contact EPA
EPA Disclaimers
Hotlines
FOIA Requests
Frequent Questions
Follow.