federal register
Wednesday
August 4, 1999
Part III
Environmental
Protection Agency
40 CFR Part 58
Air Quality Index Reporting; Final Rule
42530
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
AGENCY
40 CFR Part 58
[FRL–6409–7]
RIN 2060–AH92
Air Quality Index Reporting
AGENCY: Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA).
ACTION: Final rule.
SUMMARY: Today, EPA adopts revisions
to the uniform air quality index used by
States for daily air quality reporting to
the general public in accordance with
section 319 of the Clean Air Act (Act).
These changes include the addition of
the following elements: a new category
described as ‘‘unhealthy for sensitive
groups;’’ two new requirements, first, to
report a pollutant-specific sensitive
group statement when the index is
above 100, and second, to use specific
colors if the index is reported in a color
format; new breakpoints for the ozone
(03) sub-index in terms of 8-hour
average 03 concentrations; a new sub-
index for fine particulate matter (PM2.5);
and conforming changes to the sub-
indices for coarse particulate matter
(PM10), carbon monoxide (CO), and
sulfur dioxide (SO2). In addition, EPA is
changing the name of the index from the
Pollutant Standards Index (PSI) to the
Air Quality Index (AQI). This document
discusses the development of related
informational materials on pollutant-
specific health effects and sensitive
groups and on precautionary actions
that can be taken by individuals to
reduce exposures of concern. This
document also discusses the
interrelationship between the uniform
air quality index and other programs
that provide air quality information and
related health information to the general
public, including State and local real-
time air quality data mapping and
community action programs.
EFFECTIVE DATE: October 4, 1999.
ADDRESSES: A docket containing
information relating to EPA’s revisions
of the air quality index (Docket No. A–
98–20) is available for public inspection
in the Air and Radiation Docket and
Information Center, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, South Conference
Center, Room M–1500, 401 M St., SW,
Washington, DC 20460, telephone (202)
260–7548. The docket may be inspected
between 8 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. on
weekdays, and a reasonable fee may be
charged for copying. For the availability
of related information, see
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:
Terence Fitz-Simons, EPA (MD–14),
Research Triangle Park, NC 27711,
telephone (919) 541–0889, e-mail fitz-
simons.terence@epa.gov. For health
effects information, contact Susan Lyon
Stone, EPA (MD–15), Research Triangle
Park, NC 27711, telephone (919) 541–
1146, e-mail stone.susan@epa.gov.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: In
compliance with President Clinton’s
June 1, 1998 Executive Memorandum on
Plain Language in government writing,
this package is written using plain
language. Thus, the use of ‘‘we’’ or ‘‘us’’
in this package refers to EPA. The use
of ‘‘you’’ refers to the reader and may
include industry, State and local
agencies, environmental groups and
other interested individuals.
Availability of Related Information
Certain documents are available from
the U.S. Department of Commerce,
National Technical Information Service,
5285 Port Royal Road, Springfield, VA
22161. Available documents include:
(1) The Review of the National
Ambient Air Quality Standards for
Ozone: Assessment of Scientific and
Technical Information (‘‘Staff Paper’’)
(EPA–452/R–96–007, June 1996, NTIS
# PB–96–203435, $67.00 paper copy and
$21.50 microfiche). (Add a $3.00
handling charge per order.)
(2) Review of the National Ambient
Air Quality Standards for Particulate
Matter: Policy Assessment of Scientific
and Technical Information (‘‘Staff
Paper’’) (EPA–452/R–96–013, July 1996,
NTIS # PB–97–115406, $47.00 paper
copy and $19.50 microfiche). (Add a
$3.00 handling charge per order.)
The guidance documents associated
with this rulemaking are available from
EPA’s Office of Air Quality Planning
and Standards in Research Triangle
Park, NC. Requests for these
publications can be mailed to: Terence
Fitz-Simons, EPA (MD–14), Research
Triangle Park, NC 27711. Your request
may also be phoned in to Terence Fitz-
Simons at 919–541–0889, or sent by e-
mail to fitz-simons.terence@epa.gov.
(1) Guideline for Public Reporting of
Daily Air Quality—Air Quality Index
(AQI) (EPA–454/R–99–010).
(2) Guideline for Developing an
Ozone Forecasting Program (EPA–454/
R–99–009).
The following document is available
from EPA’s Office of Mobile Sources
(OMS) in Ann Arbor, MI. Requests for
this publication can be mailed to:
Michael Ball, US EPA—National
Vehicle and Fuel Emissions Laboratory
(NVFEL), 2000 Traverwood Dr., Ann
Arbor, MI 48103. Your request may also
be phoned in to Michael Ball at 734–
214–4897, or sent by e-mail to
ball.michael@epa.gov.
(1) Community Action Programs:
Blueprint for Program Design (EPA 420–
R–98–003).
Table of Contents
I. Background
A. What Are the Legislative Requirements?
B. What Is the History of the Air Quality
Index?
C. What Programs Are Related to the AQI?
1. Ozone and Particulate Matter NAAQS
Revisions
2. Real-Time Data Reporting Initiative
(Ozone Mapping Project)
3. Community Action Programs
II. Rationale for Final Revisions
A. What Revisions Did We Propose?
1. What Were the Proposed General
Changes?
2. What Were the Proposed Changes to the
Sub-Indices?
B. What Were the Significant Comments
and Our Responses?
1. Comments and Responses on General
Changes
2. Comments and Responses on Changes to
the Sub-Indices
C. What Are the Final Revisions?
1. What Are the General Changes?
2. What Are the Changes to the Sub-
Indices?
D. What Are the Related Informational
Materials?
III. Regulatory and Environmental Impact
Analyses
A. Executive Order 12866: OMB Review of
‘‘Significant Actions’’
B. Regulatory Flexibility Analysis/Small
Business Regulatory Enforcement
Fairness Act
C. Unfunded Mandates Reform Act
D. Paperwork Reduction Act
E. Executive Order 13045: Children’s
Health
F. Executive Order 12848: Environmental
Justice
G. Executive Order 12875: Enhancing
Intergovernmental Partnerships
H. Executive Order 13084: Consultation
and Coordination with Indian Tribal
Governments
I. National Technology Transfer and
Advancement Act
J. Congressional Review Act
IV. References
I. Background
A. What Are the Legislative
Requirements?
Section 319 of the Act governs the
establishment of a uniform air quality
index for reporting of air quality. This
section directs the Administrator to
‘‘promulgate regulations establishing an
air quality monitoring system
throughout the United States which
utilizes uniform air quality monitoring
criteria and methodology and measures
such air quality according to a uniform
air quality index’’ and ‘‘provides for
daily analysis and reporting of air
42531
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
1 Significant harm levels are those ambient
concentrations of air pollutants that present an
imminent and substantial endangerment to public
health or welfare, or to the environment, as
established in 40 CFR 51.151.
2 Intermediate index values of 200, 300, and 400
were defined and are the basis for the Alert,
Warning, and Emergency episode levels included in
40 CFR part 51, appendix L, as part of the
Prevention of Air Pollution Emergency Episodes
program. This program requires specified areas to
have contingency plans in place and to implement
these plans during episodes when high levels of air
pollution, approaching the SHL, are in danger of
being reached. Changes to this emergency episode
program will be proposed in the near future.
Below an index value of 100, historically an
intermediate value of 50 was defined either as the
level of the annual standard if an annual standard
has been established (for PM10 and SO2), or as a
concentration equal to one-half the value of the
short-term standard used to define an index value
of 100 (for O3 and CO). Coarse or inhalable
particulate matter, PM10, refers to particles with an
aerodynamic diameter less than or equal to a
nominal 10 micrometers.
3 PM2.5 refers to particles with an aerodynamic
diameter less than or equal to a nominal 2.5
micrometers.
quality based upon such uniform air
quality index * * *’’.
B. What Is the History of the Air Quality
Index?
In 1976, we established a nationally
uniform AQI, called the Pollutant
Standards Index (PSI), for use by State
and local agencies on a voluntary basis
(41 FR 37660). This uniform index was
established in light of a study conducted
by EPA and the President’s Council on
Environmental Quality (CEQ, 1976).
This study found that the 55 urban areas
in the U.S. and Canada reporting an
index of air quality used 14 different
indices, in conjunction with different
cautionary messages, such that in
essence 55 different indices were being
used to report air quality. This diversity
of indices sent a confusing message
about air quality to the public. Based in
part on this study, we developed an
index to meet the needs of State and
local agencies that has the following
advantages: it sends a clear and
consistent message to the public by
providing nationally uniform
information on air quality; it is keyed as
appropriate to the national ambient air
quality standards (NAAQS) and the
significant harm level (SHL) 1 which
have a scientific basis relating air
quality and public health; it is simple
and easily understood by the public; it
provides a framework for reflecting
changes to the NAAQS; and it can be
forecasted to provide advance
information on air quality.
The PSI, which is also commonly
referred to by some State and local
agencies as the AQI, includes sub-
indices for O3, PM, CO, SO2, and
nitrogen oxide (NO2), which relate
ambient pollutant concentrations to
index values on a scale from 0 through
500. This represents a very broad range
of air quality, from pristine air to air
pollution levels that present imminent
and substantial endangerment to the
public. The index has historically been
normalized across pollutants by
defining an index value of 100 as the
numerical level of the short-term (i.e.,
averaging time of 24-hours or less)
primary NAAQS for each pollutant and
an index value of 500 as the SHL.2 Such
index values serve to divide the index
into categories, with each category being
identified by a simple informative
descriptor. The descriptors are intended
to convey to the public information
about how air quality within each
category relates to public health, with
increasing public health concerns being
conveyed as the categories range to the
upper end of the scale. Additional
information about the general health
effects associated with each category,
and precautions that sensitive groups
and the general public can take to avoid
exposures of concern, has been made
available through an informational
booklet, updated as appropriate, that
also presents and explains the PSI (EPA,
1994).
In 1979, we made changes to the AQI,
in part to reflect revisions to the
NAAQS for O3, and to establish
requirements for AQI reporting (44 FR
27598). The requirement for State and
local agencies to report the AQI appears
in 40 CFR part 58.50, and the specific
requirements (e.g., what to report, how
to report, reporting frequency,
calculations) are in appendix G to 40
CFR part 58.
C. What Programs Are Related to the
AQI?
Historically, State and local agencies
have used primarily the AQI, or other
AQIs, to provide general information to
the public about air quality and its
relationship to public health. In recent
years, many States and local agencies, as
well as EPA, have been developing new
and innovative programs and initiatives
to provide more information to the
public, in a more timely way. These
initiatives, including real-time data
reporting through the Ozone Mapping
Project and community action programs,
can serve to provide useful, up-to-date,
and timely information to the public
about air pollution and its effects. Such
information will help individuals take
actions to avoid or reduce exposures of
concern and can encourage the public to
take actions that will reduce air
pollution on days when levels are
projected to be in air quality categories
of concern to local communities. Thus,
these programs are significantly
broadening the ways in which State and
local agencies can meet the nationally
uniform AQI reporting requirements,
and are contributing to State and local
efforts to provide community health
protection and to attain or maintain
compliance with the NAAQS. We and
State and local agencies recognize that
these programs are interrelated with
AQI reporting and with the information
on the effects of air pollution on public
health that is generated through the
periodic review, and revision when
appropriate, of the NAAQS.
The most recent revisions to the O3
and PM NAAQS, the Ozone Mapping
Project, and community action programs
are discussed briefly below. In light of
the interrelationships among these
programs, we have developed today’s
revisions to the uniform AQI with the
goal of creating a revised AQI that can
effectively serve as a nationally uniform
link across these programs. In so doing,
we intend to support and encourage
State and local participation in real-time
data reporting initiatives and the
development and implementation of
community action programs that serve
public education and health protection
goals.
1. Ozone and Particulate Matter NAAQS
Revisions
On July 18, 1997, we revised the
primary NAAQS for O3 and PM based
on a thorough review of the scientific
evidence linking exposures to ambient
concentrations of these pollutants to
adverse health effects at levels allowed
by the previous NAAQS. In particular,
we replaced the 1-hour O3 NAAQS with
an 8-hour O3 NAAQS and
supplemented the PM NAAQS with 24-
hour and annual standards for fine
particulate matter (measured as PM2.5 3).
These decisions were challenged in the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia Circuit, and on May 14, 1999,
the Court remanded them to the Agency
for further consideration, principally in
light of constitutional concerns
regarding section 109 of the Act as
interpreted by EPA. American Trucking
Associations v. EPA, Nos. 97–1440, 97–
1441 (D.C. Cir. May 14, 1999). On June
28, 1999, the U.S. Department of Justice
on behalf of EPA filed a petition for
rehearing seeking review of the Court’s
decision by the entire Court of Appeals.
The EPA is continuing to assess what
further legal or administrative
proceedings may be appropriate in
response to the Court’s decision, as well
42532
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
4 Under section 319, the levels that are
appropriate for this purpose do not necessarily
depend on the NAAQS levels that may be
appropriate under section 109. Depending on how
the Agency chose to set an ambient standard, for
example, it might conclude that the standard does
not need to preclude certain effects falling below
the level of public health concern, and at the same
time set the AQI in such a way as to assure that
sensitive individuals who might experience those
effects receive notification and advice on actions
they might take to avoid them. Similarly, AQI
values might be set that are higher than the
standard would permit but that would require more
serious health warnings. This is not to say,
however, that the levels of the 1997 NAAQS are
irrelevant to decisions on the AQI breakpoints. To
the contrary, the levels of the 1997 NAAQS are
useful surrogates for a series of scientific
conclusions reached in the NAAQS rulemakings,
based on the revised air quality criteria, regarding
the nature, extent, and severity of health effects
associated with varying concentrations of PM and
O3 in the air. Accordingly, later sections of this
notice make reference as appropriate to relevant
levels of the 1997 NAAQS.
5 CASAC is a scientific advisory committee
established under the Act to review the scientific
criteria and standards and to advise the
Administrator on revision of the NAAQS, as
appropriate.
as its relevance to other rulemakings
such as this one.
With respect to the present
rulemaking, we have concluded that it
is appropriate to proceed with final
action on the proposed AQI revisions.
As indicated previously, section 319 of
the Act requires the Agency to establish
a uniform air quality index, and this
requirement is independent of the
statutory provisions governing
establishment and revision of the
NAAQS. Moreover, there is no statutory
requirement that the AQI be linked to
the NAAQS, although EPA has used
NAAQS levels in the past as reference
points for the establishment of specific
breakpoints within sub-indices. Nothing
in the Court’s opinion alters the
conclusions EPA reached in revising the
air quality criteria for PM and O3 under
section 108 of the Act, or in the NAAQS
rulemakings, concerning the occurrence
of specific health effects at varying
concentrations of PM and O3 in the air.
Regardless of the outcome of the remand
as to the NAAQS themselves, we believe
the scientific record and conclusions
underlying them are more than
sufficient as a basis for decisions on the
levels at which the public should be
notified about health risks associated
with daily air quality.4
We do not regard this notification
function as involving the constitutional
concerns raised in the Court’s opinion.
The AQI has no bearing on pollution
control requirements for specific
sources; nor does it serve to implement
the NAAQS involved in the litigation.
Rather, it provides information on air
quality and health that will help
individual citizens take prudent, self-
protective actions to avoid or reduce
exposures of concern and to avoid
contributing to air pollution on days
when unhealthy air quality is projected.
In this regard, the AQI is essentially a
way of conveying scientific/medical
advice to the public in an easily
understood form.
As indicated below, there was broad
support in public comments for
modifying and expanding the use of the
AQI to take into account the expanded
understanding of air quality-health
relationships that resulted from EPA’s
review of the latest scientific
information on the effects of PM and O3.
Other proposed revisions were designed
to enhance the effectiveness of the AQI
generally. The function the AQI serves
of conveying to the public information
on daily air quality and associated
health risks is clearly important, and the
season of higher pollution levels is
imminent. For all the above reasons, we
see no reason to delay final action on
the proposed revisions of the AQI. The
remainder of this section discusses
aspects of the O3 and PM NAAQS
rulemakings as they relate to today’s
action.
As a result of the reviews of the
scientific information upon which the
1997 NAAQS for O3 and PM are based,
an expanded understanding emerged as
to the nature of the relationships
between exposure to ambient
concentrations of these pollutants and
the health effects likely to be
experienced, especially near the level of
the NAAQS. We and the Clean Air
Scientific Advisory Committee
(CASAC) 5 recognized that for these
pollutants there may be no thresholds
below which health effects are not likely
to occur, but rather a continuum of
effects potentially extending down to
background levels. As ambient
concentrations increase, the proportion
of individuals likely to experience
effects and the seriousness of the health
effects increase. Thus, the 1997
standards were not considered risk free.
While the standards were intended to
protect public health with an adequate
margin of safety, in accordance with
section 109(b) of the Act, including the
health of sensitive groups, exposures to
ambient concentrations just below the
numerical level of the standards may
result in exposures of concern for the
most sensitive individuals. Conversely,
exposures to ambient concentrations
just above the numerical level of the
standards are not likely to result in
exposures of concern for most healthy
people. This expanded understanding is
reflected in the forms of the new
standards, which allow for multiple
days above the numerical level of the
standards.
These understandings were also
reflected in CASAC’s advice to the
Administrator during the O3 NAAQS
review, urging expansion of the public
health advisory system (i.e., a uniform
AQI) and communication to the public
of the apparent nonthreshold nature of
the health effects. More specifically, a
number of CASAC panel members
recommended ‘‘that an expanded air
pollution warning system be initiated so
that sensitive individuals can take
appropriate ‘exposure avoidance’
behavior’’ (Wolff, 1995). Consistent with
this advice, in the preamble to the
proposed revisions to the O3 NAAQS
(61 FR 65733–65734), the Administrator
requested comment on the usefulness of
providing specific health effects
information when ambient
concentrations are around the numerical
level of the standard, the
appropriateness of using the AQI to
convey such information to the public,
the possible addition of two new AQI
categories (one just above and one just
below the numerical level of the
standard) and associated descriptors
and levels, as well as related health
effects and cautionary statements.
Broad support for modifying the AQI
was received in public comments on
this aspect of the O3 NAAQS proposal,
as discussed in the final rule
establishing revisions to the O3 NAAQS
(62 FR 38873–38874). Commenters
overwhelmingly endorsed expanding
the use of the AQI for various reasons,
although many expressed concern with
the possible category descriptors
suggested in the proposal (i.e.,
‘‘moderately good’’ and ‘‘moderately
unhealthful’’). Many commenters felt
that an expanded AQI could help
particularly sensitive people take action
to minimize their exposures, and that
the AQI could be combined with
community action programs to reduce
ambient concentrations when the
numerical level of the standard was
forecasted to be exceeded. Some
commenters endorsed increasing the
specificity of health and cautionary
statements related to the AQI categories.
Commenters from State and local
agencies encouraged us to develop any
approaches to revising the AQI in
consultation with them, specifically in
the areas of sharing real-time monitoring
data, risk communication with the
public, and coordination of a national
program.
2. Real-time Data Reporting Initiative
(Ozone Mapping Project)
The Ozone Mapping Project is part of
EPA’s Environmental Monitoring for
42533
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
Public Access and Community Tracking
(EMPACT) initiative—a new approach
to providing timely environmental
information to communities. It is a
cooperative effort of the EPA, State and
local air pollution control agencies, and
regional organizations including the
Mid-Atlantic Regional Air Management
Association (MARAMA), the Northeast
States for Coordinated Air Use
Management (NESCAUM), the northeast
Ozone Transport Commission (OTC),
the Lake Michigan Air Directors
Consortium (LADCO), SouthEast States
Air Resource Managers (SESARM), and
Central States Air Resource Agencies
(CenSARA). During the summer of 1998,
EPA’s Office of Air Quality Planning
and Standards assumed coordination of
the project.
The Ozone Map provides simple and
timely information about ground-level
O3. During the 1998 O3 season it was
available on EPA’s AIRNOW web site
(http://www.epa.gov/airnow) and on
some local television and news reports.
It is an animated contour map that
shows concentrations of O3, in
categories ranging from good to
moderate to varying degrees of
unhealthy, based on AQI values, as they
develop across the eastern United
States. In 1998, the map was created
from real-time, hourly O3 data provided
by a network of more than 400 air
monitoring stations from South Carolina
to Wisconsin and Maine. When
accessed on a computer, cautionary
statements for each category could be
displayed by running a cursor over the
legend. Also available on the AIRNOW
web site were still maps of maximum
values and forecasted values, and
archived animated maps. In 1999, the
ozone mapping coverage is being
expanded to include 31 States and over
1500 monitors across the eastern and
central U.S., and California. In addition,
TV weather service providers are
planning to carry the Ozone Map and
forecasts as part of their traditional
weather packages for local TV stations.
Along with the Ozone Map, the
AIRNOW web site contains information
about O3 health effects in the ‘‘Health
Facts’’ section, and emission reduction
activities in the ‘‘What You Can Do’’
section. It also provides links to real-
time data, and community action
program web sites, that are maintained
by State and local agencies around the
country. The goals of the web site are to:
(1) Provide real-time air pollution data
in an understandable, visual format, (2)
provide information about the public
health and environmental effects of air
pollution, and (3) provide the public
with information about ways in which
they can protect their health and actions
they can take to reduce pollution.
3. Community Action Programs
The implementation of community
action programs (also referred to as
voluntary action programs or episodic
emission control programs) is becoming
increasingly popular across the country
as an innovative approach used to
reduce emissions of O3 precursors, CO,
and PM. Motivation for implementation
of this type of program often stems from
local government and business concerns
about the NAAQS attainment status of
the area and the restrictions, additional
controls, and costs associated with
being classified as a nonattainment area.
Many areas are also motivated by public
health concerns and believe that
increasing the amount of air quality
information available to sensitive
populations raises awareness and
results in significant health benefits.
Specific goals which are usually
associated with community action
programs include: (1) Educate the
public and enhance protection of public
health; (2) attain or maintain NAAQS
attainment status and the associated
economic benefits; (3) meet specific
emission reduction targets; and (4)
manage/reduce traffic congestion.
Community action programs are
usually voluntary and generally provide
multiple steps that the public, business,
and industry can take to reduce
emissions when higher levels of air
pollution are forecast to occur,
including in particular transportation-
related measures such as trip reduction,
postponement of certain activities such
as vehicle refueling, and maintenance of
cars. The programs emphasize educating
the public about the impact of
individual activities on local air quality
and the basics of air pollution. The
educational component of these
programs also helps to create a strong
link between environmental goals and
associated public health benefits.
Most of these programs are based on
the categories of the AQI and make use
of the AQI descriptors and related
health effects and cautionary statements
on action days. By linking action days
to the AQI, local control programs hope
to alter individual behavior to reduce
emissions and to reduce exposures to
the population. In addition to reduced
pollutant exposure of the general
population due to improved air quality,
there are other health benefits directly
associated with community action
programs that can be enhanced by
linkage to the AQI. Different population
groups are more sensitive to the harmful
effects of the different air pollutants
included in the AQI, and the revisions
to the AQI being adopted today, together
with related informational materials,
will significantly improve the
effectiveness of communications with
these groups. Public education, or
programs directly targeting these
groups, may provide the most
significant benefits of a community
action program. Forecasting days with
elevated pollution levels, and then
communicating effectively about air
quality and associated health effects,
may help these groups selectively limit
their outdoor activities and, therefore,
limit their potential for exposures of
concern.
We are committed to providing States
and local agencies with support in their
efforts to meet air quality standards, to
inform the public about air quality, and
to educate the public about the impacts
of air pollution. The revisions to the
AQI being adopted today have as a goal
the creation of a revised AQI that can
effectively serve as a nationally uniform
link across the range of programs (e.g.,
real-time data reporting initiatives,
community action programs) that have
these functions.
In support of community action
programs, we have developed
informational materials related to the
AQI, including the health effects and
cautionary statements associated with
each category and more detailed health
effects information (see section II.D.),
available on the AIRNOW web site, that
State and local agencies may use to
enhance their community action
programs. Focusing on transportation
measures that are often a major
component of community action
programs, EPA’s OMS has developed a
report entitled, ‘‘Community Action
Programs: Blueprint for Program
Design.’’ This document describes the
major steps needed to put together a
successful episodic control program and
provides criteria that State and local
agencies can use to examine and
evaluate their own programs. The report
is available from OMS (see Availability
of Related Information).
II. Rationale for Final Revisions
In developing the revisions to the AQI
that are being adopted today, we sought
extensive input from State and local
agencies and from the public. We
sponsored a workshop with State and
local agencies, participated in numerous
meetings, prepared and made available
a staff draft revision to the AQI sub-
index for O3 for use during the 1998 O3
season, and conducted several focus
groups across the nation to obtain
public input on the effectiveness of draft
revisions to the AQI and related O3
maps and informational materials. A
42534
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
6 For NO2, the index ranges from 200 to 500, since
there is no short-term NAAQS for this pollutant.
detailed history of the process leading to
the proposal and the rationale for the
proposed revisions are described more
fully in the December 9, 1998 proposal
notice (63 FR 67818–67834). The sub-
sections below contain a description of
the revisions we proposed, a discussion
of the significant comments we received
and our responses to them, and a
summary of the AQI we are adopting
today.
A. What Revisions Did We Propose?
The primary consideration that
shaped the proposed revisions was the
importance of providing nationally
uniform health information associated
with daily ambient levels of the air
pollutants included in the index,
consistent with the requirement of
section 319 of the Act for an index to
achieve national uniformity in daily air
quality reporting. More specifically, the
proposed changes to the AQI sub-
indices for O3 and PM reflected the 1997
revisions to the O3 and PM NAAQS. The
proposed general changes to the
structure of the AQI were based on the
expanded understanding that emerged
during the O3 and PM reviews as to the
nature of the relationships between
exposure to ambient concentrations of
these pollutants and the health effects
likely to be experienced, consideration
of the implications of changes for the
other pollutants, and broad input from
State and local agencies and the public.
The proposed general changes to the
AQI, together with related informational
materials, were intended to expand the
use of the AQI to provide more
pollutant-specific health information,
especially when ambient concentrations
are close to the level of the primary
NAAQS.
1. What Were the Proposed General
Changes?
a. Categories and related descriptors,
index values and colors. The AQI
currently incorporates the pollutants O3,
PM, CO, SO2, and NO2. Index values
range from 0 to 500 6, and the index is
segmented into five categories named by
descriptor words that were chosen to
characterize the relationship between
daily air quality and public health. To
reflect better the current understanding
of the health effects associated with
exposure to these air pollutants, we
proposed to revise the AQI categories
and descriptors, and to associate
specific colors with the categories as
shown below in Table 1.
TABLE
1.—PROPOSED
CATEGORY
INDEX VALUES, DESCRIPTORS, AND
COLORS
Index values
Descriptor
Color
0–50 .............
Good ...................
Green
51–100 .........
Moderate .............
Yellow
101–150 .......
Unhealthy for sen-
sitive groups.
Orange
151–200 .......
Unhealthy ............
Red
201–300 .......
Very unhealthy ....
Purple
301–500 .......
Hazardous ...........
Maroon
These proposed changes reflected the
addition of a new category above an AQI
of 100, created by dividing the current
‘‘unhealthful’’ category into two
categories.
When air quality is in the ‘‘unhealthy
for sensitive groups’’ range, people that
are in the sensitive group, whether the
sensitivity is due to medical conditions,
exposure conditions, or inherent
sensitivity, may experience exposures of
concern. However, exposures to ambient
concentrations in this range are not
likely to result in exposures of concern
for most healthy people. The descriptor
‘‘unhealthy for sensitive groups’’ was
chosen to convey this message clearly.
Participants in focus groups (SAIC 1998)
clearly understood that ‘‘sensitive
groups’’ does not refer to the general
public, indicating that this descriptor
effectively communicates the intended
health message. This category would
include a caution that while perhaps of
interest to all citizens, would be of
particular interest to individuals and
families of individuals who are
members of sensitive groups.
As air quality moves into the
‘‘unhealthy’’ range, exposures are
associated with an increase in the
number of individuals who could
potentially experience effects and
includes a greater proportion of
members of the general public. Based on
input received in the development of
the proposal, the descriptor
‘‘unhealthy’’ appropriately characterizes
air quality in this range.
In addition to an increasing number of
exposures of concern, when air quality
moves into the ‘‘unhealthy’’ range and
above, individuals who were affected at
lower levels, typically members of
sensitive groups, are likely to
experience more serious health effects
than members of the general public. To
reflect this understanding, it is
appropriate to convey two messages in
the cautionary statements for both the
‘‘unhealthy’’ and ‘‘very unhealthy’’
categories. One message is directed to
members of sensitive groups, and the
other is directed to the general public.
The use of a distinct cautionary message
for members of sensitive groups is
entirely consistent with an original goal
that the index be based on the
relationships between pollutant
concentrations and adverse health
effects within various groups, e.g.,
aggravation of disease in people with
respiratory disease and incidence of
respiratory effects in healthy people.
Guidance on pollutant-specific
cautionary statements related to the
categories of the AQI is discussed below
in section II.D.
Consistent with the overarching goal
of national uniformity in the reporting
of air quality, we proposed that the
specific colors listed in Table 1 be
associated with each category. While the
AQI can be reported without the use of
colors (through text and numbers alone),
when the index is reported using colors,
we proposed to require that only these
specified colors be used. Three
examples of AQI reports that use color
are the color bars that appear in many
newspapers, the color scales on State
and local agency web sites, and the
color contours of the Ozone Map. We
participated in many discussions with
State and local agencies and
associations regarding which specific
colors should be associated with the
AQI categories, particularly above an
index value of 100. These discussions
typically were in the context of either
the Ozone Mapping Project or
community action programs. It was
clear that the color associated with a
category can be part of the health effects
and cautionary message being conveyed.
Were various State and local agencies to
use different colors to represent the
same category, and thus the same level
of air quality, it could well send a
confusing message about air quality and
associated health effects to the public.
As an alternative to requiring the use
of specified colors, we solicited
comment on the option of
recommending, rather than requiring,
the use of these colors when reporting
agencies choose to report the AQI in
color format. In soliciting comment on
this alternative, we sought to allow
communities maximum flexibility in
AQI reporting, while still preserving a
nationally uniform AQI. We, therefore,
requested that commenters addressing
this issue discuss how this more flexible
approach would satisfy the statutory
language requiring a nationally uniform
AQI if different colors may be used
across the nation to represent the same
range of air quality.
b. Reporting requirements. We
proposed to change 40 CFR part 58.50
to require reporting of the AQI in all
42535
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
7 A complete list of MSAs and their boundaries
can be found in the Statistical Abstract of the
United States (1998).
Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) 7
with a population over 350,000, instead
of all urbanized areas with a population
over 200,000. This change was proposed
for consistency with the other
monitoring regulations in part 58, which
are or will be based on MSAs. This
proposed change would not, however,
have a significant impact on who is
required to report, since virtually the
same number of cities would be covered
under the proposed reporting
requirement as are covered under the
existing requirement.
Consistent with early input from State
and local agencies, we proposed to
change the rounding conventions used
to calculate index values corresponding
to pollutant concentrations at and above
the numerical level of the NAAQS to be
consistent with the rounding
conventions used in defining the
NAAQS for each pollutant. This would
avoid situations where a health advisory
could be issued that describes the air as
unhealthy, when in fact the numerical
level of the standard has not been
exceeded.
The proposed rule retained the
requirements to identify the area for
which the AQI is being reported, the
time period covered by the report, the
‘‘critical’’ pollutant for which the
reported AQI value was derived, the
AQI value, and the associated category
descriptor. Recognizing that many
agencies use a color format to report the
AQI, the proposed rule added the
requirement to report the associated
category color if a color format is used.
Because different sensitive groups are
at-risk from different pollutants, issuing
advisories for all sensitive groups who
may be affected at AQI values greater
than 100 clearly improves public health
protection. Therefore, the proposed rule
encouraged, but did not require, that
AQI reports include: appropriate health
effects and cautionary statements, all
AQI values greater than 100, the AQI for
sub-divisions of the MSA (if there are
important differences in air quality
across sub-divisions of the MSA),
possible causes for high index values,
and the actual pollutant concentrations.
These topics were also discussed in our
draft ‘‘Guideline for Public Reporting of
Daily Air Quality—Pollutant Standards
Index (PSI)’’ that was made available on
the AIRLINKS web site.
The proposed rule emphasized the
importance of forecasting the AQI by
specifying that forecasted values should
be reported, when possible, but did not
require that forecasted values be
reported. Given the importance of the
O3 sub-index in a large number of
MSAs, and the use of an 8-hour
averaging time for calculating the O3
sub-index value, forecasting the O3
index value is now more beneficial than
before. For a health advisory system to
be effective, people need to be notified
as early as possible to be able to avoid
exposures of concern. Because the O3
sub-index is based on 8-hour O3
averages, forecasting O3 concentrations
clearly would have increased value in
providing cautionary statements to the
public. We recognized that many State
and local air agencies are already
issuing health advisories based on
forecasted O3 concentrations. Since we
have determined that forecasting would
add much to the benefits of AQI
reporting, we indicated that we would
be making available guidance on
starting a forecasting program (EPA
1999b) in an area or MSA where
forecasting is not presently done.
Included in the document is guidance
on using hourly O3 concentrations as
predictors for 8-hour averages.
c. Index name. Many State and local
agencies encouraged us to change the
name of the PSI to the Air Quality
Index, or AQI, since many agencies
already use the name AQI when
reporting the AQI value to the public.
Most participants in the focus groups
preferred the name AQI, commenting
that it more clearly identified the index
as relating to the quality of the air rather
than to environmental pollution in
general. Based on these considerations,
we solicited comment on changing the
index name from Pollutant Standards
Index (PSI) to Air Quality Index (AQI).
2. What Were the Proposed Changes to
the Sub-Indices?
To conform to the proposed general
changes to the AQI discussed above,
and to reflect the recent revisions to the
O3 and PM NAAQS, we proposed
changes to the sub-indices for O3, PM,
CO, and SO2; no conforming changes are
necessary for the NO2 sub-index. The
proposed sub-indices are summarized
below in Table 2, in terms of pollutant
concentrations that correspond to
breakpoints in the index, and are
discussed in the following sections.
TABLE 2.—PROPOSED BREAKPOINTS FOR O3, PM2.5, PM10, CO, AND SO2 SUB-INDICES
AQI value
O3
PM
CO, 8-hr
(ppm)
SO2, 24-hr
(ppm)
8-hr (ppm)
1-hr (ppm)
PM2.5, 24-hr
(µg/m3)
PM10, 24-hr
(µg/m3)
50 ................
0.07 .............
.................................
15
50
4
0.03
100 ..............
0.08 .............
0.12
65
150
9
0.14
150 ..............
0.10 .............
0.16
* 100
250
12
0.22
200 ..............
0.12 .............
0.20
* 150
350
15
0.30
300 ..............
0.40 (1-hr) ...
0.40
* 250
420
30
0.60
400 ..............
0.50 (1-hr) ...
0.50
* 350
500
40
0.80
500 ..............
0.60 (1-hr) ...
0.60
* 500
600
50
1.00
* If a different SHL for PM2.5 is promulgated, these numbers will be revised accordingly.
a. Proposed ozone sub-index. On July
18, 1997, we revised the O3 primary
NAAQS to replace the 1-hour standard
with a new standard with an 8-hour
average at a level of 0.08 ppm and a
form based on the 3-year average of the
annual fourth-highest daily maximum 8-
hour average O3 concentrations
measured at each monitor within an
area (62 FR 38856–38896). These
proposed revisions were based on
findings from the most recent review of
the NAAQS indicating that the new
primary standard will provide increased
protection to the public, especially
children active outdoors and other
sensitive groups, against a wide range of
O3-induced health effects, including
decreased lung function; increased
respiratory symptoms; hospital
admissions and emergency room visits
42536
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
for respiratory causes, among children
and adults with pre-existing respiratory
disease such as asthma; inflammation of
the lung; and possible long-term damage
to the lungs. In setting this standard, we
recognized that there is no apparent
threshold below which health effects do
not occur, that the standard is not risk
free, and, thus, that exposures of
concern are possible below the
numerical level of the standard for some
extremely sensitive individuals.
We proposed to set an index value of
100 equal to the level of the 8-hour O3
standard. Recognizing the continuum of
health effects, we considered the results
of a quantitative risk assessment
(Whitfield et al., 1996) in selecting 8-
hour O3 concentrations to correspond to
index values of 50, 150 and 200. Since
no human health effects information
was available for 8-hour average O3
concentrations at significantly higher
levels, we proposed to retain the
breakpoints at the upper end of the AQI
scale (between the ‘‘very unhealthy’’
and ‘‘hazardous’’ categories and the SHL
which corresponds to the top of the PSI
scale of 500) in terms of the existing 1-
hour average concentrations.
These proposed revisions reflect the
new 8-hour O3 NAAQS and will in
almost all areas result in a more
precautionary index than the current 1-
hour sub-index. However, we
recognized that a very small number of
areas in the U.S. have atypical air
quality patterns, with very high 1-hour
daily peak O3 concentrations relative to
the associated 8-hour average
concentrations. In such areas, the use of
the current 1-hour sub-index may be
more precautionary on a given day than
the proposed 8-hour sub-index. To
allow for the reporting of the more
precautionary sub-index value, we
proposed to retain the 1-hour sub-index
at and above AQI values of 100 and to
allow the reporting of the higher of the
two O3 sub-index values. Thus, both the
new 8-hour and the current 1-hour sub-
indices, as shown in Table 2, were
included in the proposed appendix G.
Since for the large majority of areas the
8-hour sub-index will be more
precautionary, we did not propose to
require all areas to calculate both sub-
index values. Rather, we proposed to
allow areas the flexibility to calculate
both sub-index values and, when both
sub-index values are calculated, to
require that the higher value be
reported. We specifically solicited
comment on this proposed approach.
b. Proposed PM sub-index. On July
18, 1997, we revised the PM NAAQS by
adding a new set of standards for fine
particles, or PM2.5, set at levels of 15 µg/
m3 (annual) and 65 µg/m3 (24-hour
average) (62 FR 38652–38760). These
revisions were based on findings from
the most recent review of the PM
NAAQS that recently published studies
have indicated that serious health
effects were more closely associated
with the levels of the smaller particle
subset of PM10. These health effects
include premature mortality and
increased hospital admissions and
emergency room visits, primarily in the
elderly and individuals with
cardiopulmonary disease; increased
respiratory symptoms and disease in
children and individuals with
cardiopulmonary disease; decreased
lung function, particularly in children
and individuals with asthma; and
alterations in respiratory tract defense
mechanisms. In addition, PM10
standards were retained at the same
levels of 50 µg/m3 (annual) and 150 µg/
m3 (24-hour average) to continue to
provide protection against health effects
associated with the coarse particle
subset of PM10, including aggravation of
asthma and respiratory infections. To
reflect these revisions to the PM
NAAQS, we proposed to add a new sub-
index for PM2.5, and to make conforming
changes to the sub-index for PM10,
consistent with the proposed general
changes to the AQI. The proposed sub-
indices are summarized in Table 2 and
discussed below.
Proposed new PM2.5 sub-index.
Consistent with the historical method of
selecting breakpoints of the AQI, we
proposed to set an index value of 100
at the level of the 24-hour PM2.5
NAAQS, 65 µg/m3, and an index value
of 50 at the level of the annual NAAQS,
15 µg/m3. Also consistent with the basic
structure of the AQI, the proposed
upper bound index value of 500
corresponds to the SHL, established in
section 51.16 of the CFR under the
Prevention of Air Pollution Emergency
Episodes program. The SHL is set at a
level that represents an imminent and
substantial endangerment to public
health. When we propose revisions to
the Prevention of Air Pollution
Emergency Episodes program, the
proposal will include a SHL for PM2.5.
In the interim, we proposed to establish
a PM2.5 concentration of 500 µg/m3 to be
associated with a PM2.5 index value of
500.
For intermediate breakpoints in the
AQI between values of 100 and 500,
PM2.5 concentrations were proposed
that generally reflect a linear
relationship between increasing index
values and increasing PM2.5 values. The
available scientific evidence of health
effects related to population exposures
to PM2.5 concentrations between the 24-
hour NAAQS level and the proposed
PM2.5 concentration to be associated
with a PM2.5 index value of 500 suggest
a continuum of effects in this range,
with increasing PM2.5 concentrations
being associated with increasingly larger
numbers of people likely experiencing
serious health effects (62 FR 38675; Staff
Paper, p. VII–27). The proposed
generally linear relationship between
AQI values and PM2.5 concentrations in
this range, rounded to increments of 50
µg/m3 to reflect the approximate nature
of such a relationship, is consistent with
this evidence.
Proposed conforming changes to the
PM10 sub-index. Consistent with the
retention of the levels of the PM10
NAAQS, we proposed to retain the PM10
sub-index generally and to add a new
breakpoint at an index value of 150 to
conform to the proposed additional AQI
category. We proposed that this
breakpoint be set at a PM10 24-hour
average concentration of 250 µg/m3, the
mid-point between the breakpoints
associated with index values of 100 and
200. We believe that the PM10 sub-
index, with this conforming change,
remains appropriate for the public
health protection purposes of the AQI.
c. Proposed conforming changes to
the CO and SO2 sub-indices. Since the
current AQI sub-indices reflect the
current NAAQS for CO and SO2, the
only change we proposed for these sub-
indices was to add a breakpoint to each
sub-index at an index value of 150 to
conform to the proposed additional AQI
category. We proposed that these
breakpoints be set at concentrations at
the mid-points between the breakpoints
associated with index values of 100 and
200, consistent with the approach
described above for conforming changes
to both the 1-hour O3 sub-index and the
PM10 sub-index. These proposed
breakpoints are summarized in Table 2
and will be reviewed in conjunction
with the future reviews of the CO and
SO2 NAAQS.
B. What Were the Significant Comments
and Our Responses?
This section describes the significant
comments we received on proposed
revisions to the index and our general
responses to them. More detailed
comment summaries and responses are
contained in a Response to Comments
Document that is available in the docket
(see ADDRESSES).
1. Comments and Responses on General
Changes
a. Categories and related descriptors,
index values and colors. With regard to
the proposed changes to the general
structure of the index, we received
comments that focused on two major
42537
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
issues. The first major issue was
whether to add a category above or
below the standard, or both. In addition,
related to that issue were comments
about the proposed descriptor for the
category we proposed to add above the
level of the standard. The second major
issue regarded the particular colors,
listed in Table 1, we proposed to
associate with each category.
With regard to the general structure of
the index, most commenters supported
our proposal to add a category above the
level of the standard. However,
commenters from environmental groups
and several States suggested adding a
category below the level of the standard
to provide additional caution for
members of sensitive groups, instead of,
or in addition to one above. These
commenters expressed the view that the
proposed sub-indices, that added a
category above the standard, did not
sufficiently caution members of
sensitive groups about health effects
occurring below the level of the
standard. Specifically, their comments
were in reference only to potential
health effects occurring below the 8-
hour O3 and 24-hour PM2.5 standards.
Regarding health effects below the PM2.5
standard, one State commenter took
exception with the statement in the
proposal that an additional category
below the standard, while perhaps
meaningful for O3, would not be an
appropriate distinction for the other
pollutants in the index. This commenter
noted that ‘‘such a distinction would be
more imperative for other pollutants,
especially for PM where the level of the
24-hour standard may be less protective
of sensitive groups than the ozone
standard.’’ (Docket No. A–98–20, IV–D–
19). Agreeing with the importance of
cautioning sensitive groups below the
level of the 24-hour PM2.5 standard,
another commenter noted ‘‘We believe
that adding a category below the level
of the standard is of particular
importance with respect to fine
particles.’’ (Docket No. A–98–20, IV–D–
11). Regarding the O3 sub-index, some
of the States and the environmental
groups that endorsed adding a category
below the level of the standard
supported that position by noting that
we and CASAC stated that extremely
sensitive individuals may be affected
down to background levels of O3. One
comment from an environmental group
noted that:
The CASAC recognized that for O3 and fine
particle pollution, ‘‘there are no discernible
thresholds below which health effects are not
likely to occur in the most sensitive
individuals’ as it was advising EPA to set
new health standards. We agree with CASAC
and support the idea of setting ‘‘an expanded
air pollution warning system (to) be initiated
so that sensitive individuals can take
appropriate exposure avoidance behavior,’’
however EPA has misrepresented the health
threat with the levels it has proposed.
(Docket No. A–98–20, IV–D–17).
A State commenter that supported
adding a category below the level of the
standard observed that adding such a
category would be consistent with
EPA’s conclusion ‘‘that exposures to
ambient concentrations just below the
numerical level of the standard may
result in exposures of concern for the
most sensitive individuals.’’ (Docket No.
A–98–20, IV–D–19).
We understand and agree with the
issues related to communication of risk
below the levels of the 24-hour PM2.5
and 8-hour O3 standards. For the PM2.5
sub-index, we have addressed concerns
about health effects below the level of
the 24-hour PM2.5 standard by revising
the PM2.5 sub-index so sensitive groups
are cautioned below the 24-hour PM2.5
standard. Based on review of the
suggested revisions to the PM2.5 sub-
index that we received in comments, we
believe this approach fully addresses
their concerns. The revision is
discussed in section II.B.2 below.
For better communication of health
risk below the 8-hour O3 standard, we
have addressed the issues raised by
commenters by revising the O3 sub-
index. We have expanded the
‘‘moderate’’ range of the 8-hour O3 sub-
index to make it more precautionary.
When air quality is in the ‘‘moderate’’
range of the 8-hour O3 sub-index, we
have provided health effects and
cautionary statements, available in our
AQI Reporting Guidance document
(EPA, 1999a) (discussed in section II.D),
that may be used by State and local
agencies to caution unusually sensitive
individuals below the level of the 8-
hour O3 standard. This revision is
discussed in section II.B.2 below.
We do not believe it is necessary or
appropriate to change the general
structure of the index by adding a new
category below the level of the standard
to caution extremely sensitive
individuals. Based on the concerns of
State and local agencies that the
addition of two new categories would
unduly complicate the index, we are
adding just one new category to
maintain the degree of simplicity
strongly supported by State and local
agencies, none of whom advocated the
addition of two new categories. As
described in section II.A.1 above, we
believe that adding a category above the
level of the standard makes a distinction
that is useful for members of sensitive
groups without alarming the general
public. As noted by one State
commenter:
We are satisfied and support the proposed
category index values, descriptors and colors.
[We] believe that the Air Quality Index * * *
has been a very effective communication tool
during the ozone season. It has been our
experience that a category above the standard
provides the proper communication to the
affected populations without alarming or
desensitizing others. (Docket No. A–98–20,
IV–G–04).
Further, given the changes we have
made to the PM2.5 sub-index, and the
expanded ‘‘moderate’’ range and the
cautionary statements we have made
available in guidance for use below the
level of the 8-hour O3 standard, we do
not believe a category below the level of
the standard to caution members of
sensitive groups would be an
appropriate distinction for any of the
pollutants included in the index. We
believe that the approach we have
adopted retains the simplicity of the
index while allowing for more detailed
cautionary information to be made
available to the public when
appropriate.
With regard to the descriptor
‘‘unhealthy for sensitive groups,’’ some
commenters expressed the view that
this descriptor is misleading because it
encompasses a large segment of the
population. In addition, they argued, the
public will not know that for certain
pollutants healthy people, especially
healthy children, are members of
sensitive groups. Noting that it is
prudent policy to assume that most risk
communication regarding air quality
impacts will be limited to the general
descriptors, some of these commenters
requested that if we continue to
distinguish sensitive groups from the
general population, that the descriptor
be changed from ‘‘unhealthy for
sensitive groups’’ to ‘‘unhealthy for
children and other sensitive groups,’’ so
that the public would receive a clear
message that children are members of a
sensitive group that may be at increased
risk from exposure to ozone. (Docket
No. A–98–20, IV–D–2, IV–D–4 and IV–
D–11). We agree with the view of these
commenters, based on the responses of
participants in the focus groups, that the
public will not know that healthy
people, including healthy children, may
be at risk when air quality is in the
‘‘unhealthy for sensitive groups’’ range.
The suggested descriptor, however, is
only appropriate for pollutants for
which children are a sensitive group.
Since the sensitive groups differ from
one pollutant to another, and children
are only part of the sensitive group for
O3, PM2.5 and NO2, this descriptor is not
appropriate for the other pollutants. For
42538
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
example, the descriptor ‘‘unhealthy for
children and other sensitive groups’’
would not be appropriate for use in the
CO sub-index, where people with heart
disease are the group most at-risk. Use
of this descriptor when CO levels are
above an index value of 100 could lead
to confusion about the health effects
associated with high levels of CO.
Therefore, we do not believe it would be
useful or prudent to adopt the
descriptor ‘‘unhealthy for children and
other sensitive groups.’’ To increase
public awareness that healthy children
are members of the sensitive group for
O3, we are adding the requirement that
when the AQI value is above 100,
reporting agencies include in their
published report a statement describing
the sensitive group for that particular
pollutant. The reporting requirement for
pollutant-specific statements describing
sensitive groups is discussed below in
section II.C.1.b on reporting
requirements, and listed in appendix G.
We believe that the requirement for
agencies to report the pollutant-specific
statements identifying the groups at
risk, when air quality is above an index
value of 100, will more effectively
communicate the risk associated with
specific air pollutants, and thereby
better help members of the public
reduce personal exposure. To the extent
possible with AQI reporting, this
requirement will also ensure that the
public is informed that children are part
of the sensitive group for O3. This
requirement will not only improve
protection for healthy children, but also
healthy adults, the elderly, and people
with heart and lung disease. We believe
that another good way to address this
lack of awareness is to educate the
public, and the media and health care
professionals that inform the public,
about the health effects message
associated with the category ‘‘unhealthy
for sensitive groups.’’ To help
accomplish the goal of educating the
public, we will be expanding the
development of education and outreach
materials and activities as described in
section II.D below.
With regard to the colors listed in
Table 1, we received comments
concerning both the particular colors
associated with the different categories
and whether specific colors should be
required or recommended. The majority
of commenters, including most State
and local agencies commenting,
supported our proposed color scheme.
Many of those (commenters that did
support it), had used the same or a
similar color scheme associated with
either community action programs or
ozone maps. Commenters that had used
the same or a similar color scheme
noted that it effectively and
appropriately portrayed the full range of
local air quality values. On the other
hand, some environmental groups and
several States commented that the color
red should be used for the category just
above standard, instead of the color
orange that we proposed. Primarily,
these commenters expressed the view
that the color orange would not send a
sufficiently strong message that the
standard has been exceeded. In the
proposal we indicated that because the
color red sends a strong cautionary
message, it is most appropriately used
when effects are likely to occur in the
general population, and when more
serious effects are likely in members of
sensitive groups. Many of these
commenters noted that since up to 30
percent of the population could be
considered to be in the sensitive group
for O3, when the standard is exceeded
the general public should be alerted.
These commenters expressed the view
that it is appropriate to use the color red
just above the level of the standard both
to alert the public of potential health
risks and to encourage emission
reduction actions. An environmental
group commented:
While individuals that are sensitive to poor
air quality may look at the daily listing in the
newspaper or call a message recorded by the
state or local air agency, we know from
experience that air quality does not receive
broad public attention until it is predicted or
reaches the level of ‘‘code red.’’ At that point,
the television and radio media announces
that people should restrict outdoor activity
and take steps to not add more pollution to
the air by carpooling, using less electricity,
or using mass transit. (Docket No. A–98–20,
IV-D–17).
Another commenter from a State
agency noted:
Considering that the definition of sensitive
individuals for ozone includes healthy active
children and outdoor workers, a clear
unambiguous message needs to be sent to the
public so that they can respond accordingly.
For parents of active children, a message
which states that air quality is unhealthy,
and displays it using the color red, sends a
clear message—even though it may carry
with it the risk that individuals not in the
sensitive population might also take
exposure avoidance measures. Issuing a
message that air quality is unhealthy for
sensitive individuals and displays it with a
code orange runs the risk of having sensitive
individuals, or those guiding sensitive
individuals (i.e., doctors and parents) not
prescribe any avoidance action because of the
ambiguity of the message. (Docket No. A–98–
20, IV-G–19).
Additionally, these commenters
suggested that the color orange be used
for the category they wanted us to add
below the level of the standard, as
described above.
In considering these comments, we
recognize that the NAAQS are set to
protect public health with an adequate
margin of safety, including the health of
sensitive groups. When the standards
are met, public health is protected.
Exposures to ambient concentrations
just above the numerical level of the
standards are not likely to result in
exposures of concern for most healthy
people. This is especially true for the 8-
hour O3 standard, which has a
concentration-based form designed to
offer more protection from higher
concentrations than from multiple
smaller exceedances of the standard.
The form of the 8-hour O3 standard
allows for multiple days above the level
of the standard, provided the 3-year
average of the fourth-highest maximum
concentrations does not exceed the level
of the standard. This means that public
health is protected, even when there are
multiple days each year when ambient
O3 concentrations are above the level of
the standard, as long as the standard is
met. Therefore, it is inappropriate on
any given day to express a high level of
concern when air quality just exceeds
the level of the standard. Besides
sending an inaccurate health effects
message by using the color red with the
category ‘‘unhealthy for sensitive
groups,’’ another concern is the
potential loss of credibility that could
result from repeatedly sending a signal
disproportionate to the expected
incidence of noticeable symptoms. If
this were to happen, the AQI could lose
the power to influence people’s
behavior to protect their health. One
commenter from a State agency
expressed this concern:
One of our key concerns * * * is that the
general public will become ambivalent if we
forecasted 20, 30, or more Code Red days
over the course of an ozone season. Under
this scenario, people may not take adequate
precautions to protect themselves when an
actual unhealthy level is reached. (Docket
No. A–98–20, IV–G–05).
A commenter from another State
agency expressed a similar view:
It is important to make sure that this
general message is not jeopardized by
treating the new 85 ppb, 8-hour standard as
the bright line between healthy and
unhealthy. The Code Red message will not be
considered credible if it is issued between 40
to 60 times a summer in our area. Last year
there were 54 days * * * where the 8-hour
standard was exceeded. (Docket No. A–98–
20, IV–G–13).
From the comments we have received
and from our focus group research, we
believe that the color red sends too
strong a message for use in the
42539
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
‘‘unhealthy for sensitive groups
category.’’ Additionally, based on the
comments of State and local agencies
that have used the same or a similar
color scheme, we believe that the color
orange sends an appropriate health
message and yet a strong message that
the standard has been exceeded. One
State commenter noted that their
environmental agency:
has been using a green/yellow/orange/red
communication system since 1993. The
media has used the red, orange and yellow
air quality codes to convey a ‘‘the air is not
clean’’ message. In general, the media has
used Code Red to convey a message that air
pollution is or will be at a near emergency
level. Code Orange has connoted ‘‘very
dirty.’’ Code Yellow has, in general, been
used to characterize air pollution as not too
bad—but still not clean. (Docket No. A–98–
20, IV–G–13).
Another State commenter noted:
We disagree, however, with * * * [the]
assertion that the ‘‘Code Orange’’ message in
the PSI does not adequately protect public
health. Our experience * * * has been that
the health message can be effectively
delivered for Code Orange levels. We have
received much feedback from the general
public about our ozone action day program,
and the resounding message has been: Thank
you for this program, I can now plan my day
to avoid exposure to high levels of ozone.
(Docket No. A–98–20, IV–G–05).
In addition, ozone mapping projects
have successfully represented air
quality using the full AQI color scheme.
In the Ozone Mapping Project,
described in section I.C.2, the proposed
AQI color scheme was used successfully
during the 1998 O3 season. Participating
State and local agencies and regional
organizations have selected the same
color scheme for use in the 1999 O3
season. Having used the proposed color
scheme in their local O3 map, one
metropolitan air agency noted that
‘‘EPA’s proposed color scheme
communicates clearly in a logical
progression which in our experience is
already understood by the public and
the media.’’ (Docket No. A–98–20, IV–
G–11).
Because we believe the proposed
color scheme effectively and
appropriately communicates the health
effects message that was the basis for
setting the O3 and PM standards, we
have adopted the color scheme as
proposed. However, we strongly agree
with the views expressed by
commenters that it is important for the
health effects message associated with
the category ‘‘unhealthy for sensitive
groups’’ to be effectively communicated
to the public, health care providers and
the media. It is very important that
members of sensitive groups, which for
some pollutants includes healthy
children and adults, be alerted to
potential health risks and that the
general public be motivated to take
emissions reductions measures when air
quality is above the level of the
standard. In response to the concerns
expressed by these commenters, we are
planning to significantly step up the
development of education and outreach
materials and increase activities to get
this message out, as discussed in section
II.D below.
Only two commenters recommended
against requiring specific colors. The
first commenter did so on the grounds
that requiring specific colors would be
unenforceable, and may lead to
frustration and conflict. While
applauding our goal of establishing a
consistent message, and agreeing that it
is good to have as much national
consistency as possible, this commenter
noted that efforts to legislate aesthetics
are uncomfortable, unwieldy and
ultimately unnecessary. (Docket No. A–
98–20, IV–D–11). The second
commenter noted that some States may
elect to use Code Red for ozone action
programs at levels other than what is
being proposed and the regulation
should not preclude them from doing
that. (Docket No. A–98–20, IV–D–19).
On the other hand, there was very
strong support in the comments for us
to require that agencies that use color,
use specific colors in AQI reporting. All
of the other commenters that addressed
this issue, including a commenter from
an environmental organization,
supported requiring specific colors for
all State/local agencies using a color
format. The commenter from an
environmental group noted:
EPA states that revisions to the PSI have
as a goal the creation of a nationally uniform
link across a range of programs. We urge that
this uniformity be achieved through the use
of a national public health warning system
that is clear to the public. To this end, we
do support the EPA requiring that when
colors are used by a state in its PSI, that the
same color system incorporated in the PSI,
and not variants, be utilized by such state.
(Docket No. A–98–20, IV–D–21).
One of the many State commenters
agreeing with us that such a
requirement was necessary for national
uniformity, noted that ‘‘Specific colors
* * * associated with each category
should be required for national
uniformity and ease of understanding.
Anything less would defeat the purpose
of a national index for comparing air
quality in different locales.’’ (Docket No.
A–98–20, IV–D–07). Another State
commenter made the point that
‘‘Consistency of message is important,
especially if the regional nature of many
air pollution problems is to be
communicated effectively.’’ (Docket No.
A–98–20, IV–D–01).
In response to the first commenter’s
objections, we do not believe that
requiring specific colors presents any
particular enforceability problems. This
requirement is one of many contained in
the 40 CFR part 58 Ambient Air Quality
Surveillance requirements and would be
enforceable in the same manner and to
the same extent as any other
requirement of this section. As such, we
believe there is no difference in
enforceability between this and a
requirement for the use of particular
descriptors or air quality index values.
We expect to work with EPA Regional
Offices to ensure that they monitor State
implementation of the revised AQI and
work with the States to encourage
compliance.
With regard to comments that our
requirement would preclude States from
using other color schemes and action
levels in their voluntary programs, it is
important to note that the AQI addresses
the reporting of measured air quality
and does not impose any requirements
or limitations on community action
programs based on air quality forecasts.
We recognize that a nationally uniform
color scheme for AQI reporting will, as
a practical matter, complicate a State’s
efforts to use other color schemes in
action programs based on predicted air
quality, but they remain free to do so
under our regulations.
Because it is the fundamental goal of
the AQI to provide nationally uniform
information about daily air quality and
the public health messages that are
appropriately associated with various
daily air quality levels, in a format that
is timely and easily understood, we
continue to believe that requiring
specified colors when the AQI
categories are reported in color format is
both necessary and appropriate. Neither
of the commenters opposing this
requirement addressed how a more
flexible approach of recommending
specific colors, thereby allowing the use
of different colors to represent the same
range of air quality, would satisfy the
statutory language requiring a nationally
uniform air quality index. Therefore, we
are adopting the requirement, as
specified in appendix G below, that
when State and local agencies report the
AQI in a color format, that the specific
colors listed in Table 1 be associated
with each category.
b. Reporting requirements. We
received significant comments on
several issues related to the reporting
requirements, including the population
threshold and other aspects of the
reporting requirements, the appropriate
42540
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
method of monitoring and reporting the
PM sub-indices, the effect of AQI
changes relative to the SHL program,
and the effective date of the final rule.
Since we received no significant
comments on our proposal to change the
rounding conventions for calculating
the index to make them consistent with
the rounding conventions used in
defining the NAAQS, we are adopting
that revision as proposed. With regard
to the population threshold, one
commenter expressed the view that the
change from requiring AQI reporting in
urbanized areas with a population
greater than 200,000, to requiring
reporting in MSAs with populations
greater than 350,000, would raise the
threshold for the requirement and
appear to mean that large segments of
the U.S. population would not have
access to AQI reporting. (Docket No. A–
98–20, IV–D–03). We have adopted the
requirement for AQI reporting in MSAs
with populations greater than 350,000 to
be consistent with the State/Local Air
Monitoring Stations (SLAMs)
monitoring regulations in 40 CFR part
58, since AQI reporting is based on
information from SLAMS monitors that
are located and reported within the
context of MSAs. The use of MSAs also
provides for more stable reporting areas
since MSAs are usually defined by
county boundaries that typically do not
change, whereas the boundaries for
urbanized areas are very irregular, may
include parts of counties, and may
change with each census. In selecting
the MSA population threshold of
350,000, we tried to make the new
reporting requirement equivalent to the
old one. Under the new requirement,
virtually the same number of cities will
be required to report the AQI as were
previously. Because urbanized areas and
MSAs are not equivalent, we realize that
some areas will be required to report the
AQI that were not required to do so
before this rulemaking, and vice versa.
The regulation does not preclude any
area from reporting the AQI, and we
encourage State and local air agencies to
report the AQI whenever possible so
that people will be informed about local
air quality.
Another commenter noted that some
MSAs fall within the boundaries of
more than one State, and requested that
we identify which of the two or more
reporting agencies would be responsible
for reporting the AQI for the MSA.
(Docket No. A–98–20, IV–G–15). We
expect that decisions about AQI
reporting in multi-State MSAs will be
made by participating agencies in the
same manner as decisions about
activities to implement the standards
through the State Implementation Plans
(SIPs). Guidance for air quality planning
and implementation in MSAs that fall
within the boundaries of more than one
State generally calls for the participating
State and local agencies to identify, in
the SIPs for those States, who will be
responsible for the preparation and
submission of the required elements,
including AQI reports. Where a local or
regional planning organization has been
designated to carry out such
requirements, such an organization is
the appropriate one to report the AQI.
In any case, we encourage AQI reporting
on the sub-MSA level, especially where
the AQI differs within the MSA.
Another commenter urged us to
expand the requirement for AQI
reporting to areas with populations less
than 350,000, if these areas are likely
not to be in attainment for the 8-hour O3
standard. To support this position, the
commenter noted that O3 can be
transported long distances downwind
from where it is generated, resulting in
serious air quality problems in
downwind rural and smaller urban
areas. (Docket No. A–98–20, IV–G–27).
We agree with this commenter that
downwind areas may be significantly
affected by transport of O3 and
precursors. In section 5 of appendix G,
we encourage States to evaluate air
quality in affected areas downwind of
MSAs to identify the potential for
significant transport-related air quality
impacts and to expand their AQI
reporting to address these situations. We
have also changed the language in this
section such that the affected area need
not be contiguous to the reporting MSA.
On a related topic, one commenter
noted an example in which a MSA with
a population greater than 350,000, has
not registered AQI values in excess of 50
(such that AQI reporting would be
discretionary), although values above
100 are registered infrequently at a
national monument within the larger air
basin. (Docket No. A–98–20, IV–G–17).
This commenter requested that we
revise the reporting requirements to add
an air quality consideration to the
population threshold as a second
component of AQI reporting. To address
one part of this comment, we encourage
State and local air agencies to report the
AQI and issue forecasts for national
parks or monuments whenever possible,
since these are places people go to for
activities that often involve prolonged
or vigorous exertion, thereby increasing
the risk from air pollution. We have
worked with the National Park Service
to develop appropriate guidance for
visitors and staff to use when index
values are expected to be above 100 for
O3. To address the other part of this
comment, section 8 of appendix G
describes exceptions under which AQI
reporting becomes discretionary, either
for one pollutant or the entire index, for
areas with good air quality. Regarding
these exceptions, a State commenter
suggested that we require a minimum of
2 years at an AQI value lower than 50
before allowing agencies to ‘‘opt out’’ of
reporting the AQI for a particular
pollutant, so that for example, one
unusually good O3 season would not
make it possible for an agency to avoid
reporting high index values in
subsequent O3 seasons. (Docket No. A–
98–20, IV–D–06). We believe that
requiring 2 years of index values lower
than 50 before allowing State and local
agencies discretion in reporting, while
appropriate in some situations, may be
unnecessary in others. We agree with
this commenter that it is appropriate to
require reporting of higher index values,
even if air quality has been good
throughout the previous year. Therefore,
we have revised section 8 of appendix
G, such that when the criteria for an
exemption are no longer met, the
responsible agency is required to report
the AQI. Another commenter expressed
the view that we should strengthen the
minimum notification requirements, so
that when the AQI value exceeds 100,
State and local agencies are required to
report the index to all three media
(print, radio and television) to help
ensure that the public is informed that
the standard has been exceeded. (A–98–
20, IV–E–3) We agree that it is important
to inform the public when the AQI is
above 100, and therefore have
strengthened the reporting provisions in
section 6 of appendix G. In particular,
when the AQI exceeds 100, reporting
agencies should expand reporting to all
major news media, and at a minimum,
should include notification to the media
with the largest market coverages for the
area in question.
Looking at these reporting provisions
more broadly, we believe that it would
be very beneficial for reporting agencies
to educate the media about alternative
sources for this information, such as
web sites and community action
programs. Many State and local agencies
have web sites that provide quick access
to timely and accurate air quality and
related information. For State and local
agencies participating in the Ozone
Mapping Project, the media could be
directed to the AIRNOW web site as a
source of information about O3 air
quality and associated health effects for
yesterday, today and tomorrow. In
addition, this web site provides in-
depth information about O3 health
effects, sources of emissions and simple
42541
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
measures people can take to improve air
quality. Community action programs
also provide timely and accurate
information, and are often used to
inform the public when air quality is
predicted to be above an index value of
100. Tools and programs such as these
can significantly improve the timeliness
of AQI reporting and provide additional
useful information. We believe that, in
the near future, the AQI will be reported
by the regional and national media in
ways, such as the Ozone Map, that will
not be limited to specific MSAs. This
type of approach will help provide AQI
reporting for areas that would otherwise
not be covered, including, in some
cases, rural and small urban areas and
national parks.
Regarding reporting the PM sub-
indices, one commenter requested that
we clarify whether PM2.5 and PM10
should be treated as one pollutant (e.g.,
reported simply as PM) or two different
pollutants (e.g., reported separately).
(Docket No. A–98–20, IV–D–19). We
expect State and local air agencies to
report PM2.5 and PM10 separately, since
there are two separate sub-indices with
different sensitive groups, and different
health effects and cautionary
statements. In response to this
comment, we have added clarifying
language to section 9 in appendix G. In
addition, many commenters noted that
at the present time there is very little
monitoring for PM (both PM2.5 and
PM10) that is suitable for use in daily
AQI reports, and requested guidance for
the use of non-reference methods for the
purpose of AQI reporting. Since PM is
often measured at intervals longer than
every 24-hours, State and local agencies
are encouraged to use monitoring data
from continuous PM monitors for use in
AQI reporting, whenever possible. As
noted by commenters, due to the lack of
appropriate monitoring information, at
this time it may not be possible to report
the AQI for PM in many locations. To
assist State and local agencies in the use
of non-reference methods, we have
added language to section 10 of
appendix G stating that non-reference
methods may be used for the purpose of
AQI reporting if it is possible to
demonstrate a simple linear relationship
between the non-reference and the
reference methods.
Regarding the effect of changes to the
AQI on the SHL program, we received
two significant comments. One
commenter noted that our proposed
changes to the categories, to standardize
them such that the upper bound falls on
an even number, rounded to 50 (e.g.,
200), and lower bound falls on an odd
number (e.g., 201), resulted in the AQI
breakpoint of 200 being the upper
bound of the ‘‘unhealthy’’ category,
rather than the lower bound of the ‘‘very
unhealthy’’ category, as it has been
historically. Since the AQI breakpoint of
200 is also commonly used as the ‘‘Alert
Level,’’ or the first stage of an air
pollution emergency episode in
example guidance associated with the
SHL program, this commenter requested
that we leave the AQI value of 200 as
the lower breakpoint of the ‘‘very
unhealthy’’ category, so that emergency
episodes would start when air quality is
classified as ‘‘very unhealthy’’ and
include appropriate-sounding health
effects and cautionary statements.
(Docket No. A–98–20, IV–D–22). We are
adopting the breakpoints as proposed,
because we believe that it is important
to be consistent in the treatment of the
category boundaries (e.g., 51 to 100, 101
to 150, 151 to 200, etc.). When we
propose revisions to the requirements of
the SHL program, we plan to change all
references to the ‘‘Alert Level’’ so they
will refer to air quality that exceeds the
‘‘Alert Level,’’ rather than to air quality
that reaches the ‘‘Alert Level.’’ However,
State and local agencies should not
change their emergency episode plans at
this point simply because we are
adopting this consistent approach to
setting AQI breakpoints. Eventually,
some agencies may have to revise
emergency episode plans because we
have revised the AQI value of 200 for
the 8-hour O3 sub-index. But we do not
expect States to make any revisions to
their emergency episode plans until we
promulgate the revised requirements.
Finally, several commenters noted that
in the proposal, we did not specify an
effective date for the final revisions.
Some of these commenters suggested
that we extend the effective date, with
suggestions ranging from 60 days to
more than a year after publication. We
are adopting an effective date of 60 days
after publication. We believe that this
will allow adequate time for State and
local agencies to revise daily AQI
reports. We recognize that it may take
longer to revise related informational
materials, such as printed documents, or
related programs that agencies may
want to revise. However, since this
rulemaking applies only to the
requirements for daily reporting of air
quality, we believe an effective date of
60 days is adequate.
c. Index name. All commenters that
expressed a view on the index name
supported changing the name of the
index from the Pollutant Standards
Index (PSI) to the Air Quality Index
(AQI), because this name clearly
identifies the index as relating to the
quality of the air. Accordingly, we are
changing the name of the index to the
Air Quality Index, or AQI.
2. Comments and Responses on Changes
to the Sub-Indices.
All of the comments we received on
proposed changes to the sub-indices
focused on the sub-indices that were
added for O3 (8-hour) and PM2.5. Since
we did not receive specific comments
on the conforming changes we proposed
to the CO, SO2 and PM10 sub-indices,
we are adopting these sub-indices as
proposed.
a. Ozone sub-index. We received
significant comments on two issues
related to the O3 sub-index. The first
group of comments was in response to
our request for comment on retaining
the 1-hour O3 sub-index in addition to
the 8-hour O3 sub-index. The second
group of comments focused on the
appropriateness of providing
precautionary language below the level
of the 8-hour O3 standard. Regarding the
1-hour sub-index, almost all of the
comments that addressed this issue
supported retaining the 1-hour O3 sub-
index. However, one State commenter
expressed the view that the proposal
was unclear regarding how areas that
have not attained the 1-hour O3
standard are to use the new 8-hour O3
sub-index. This commenter also noted
that it might be confusing to report the
AQI based on the 8-hour O3 sub-index
in an area where the 1-hour O3 standard
had not yet been attained. (Docket No.
A–98–20, IV–D–07). We are requiring
that all State and local agencies that
report the AQI for O3 calculate the 8-
hour O3 sub-index, even if the reporting
area has not attained the 1-hour
standard. In addition to calculating the
8-hour O3 sub-index, which is required,
the reporting agency may also calculate
the 1-hour O3 sub-index, but this is not
required. However, if the reporting
agency calculates both O3 sub-index
values, it is required to report the higher
index value of the two. The AQI does
not relate to attainment status; rather, it
is a tool for reporting daily air quality
and associated health information. We
are retaining the 1-hour O3 sub-index
only because we recognize that there are
a very small number of areas in the U.S.
that have atypical air quality patterns,
with very high 1-hour daily peak O3
concentrations relative to 8-hour
average concentrations. In such areas,
an index value greater than 100 might
be calculated using the 1-hour sub-
index, even when the 8-hour sub-index
might be below 100. For these areas, the
use of the 1-hour sub-index is clearly
more precautionary. Because our major
interest is that appropriate
precautionary messages be issued, we
42542
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
8 See 63 FR 67819, 67829 (Dec. 9, 1998).
9 See 62 FR 38669–71, 38676–77 (July 18, 1997).
are not retaining a complete 1-hour O3
sub-index with ‘‘good’’ and ‘‘moderate’’
categories. Likewise, when ambient 8-
hour O3 concentrations are greater than
0.374 ppm, reporting agencies must
calculate the index value using the 1-
hour O3 sub-index. This is because no
human health effects information is
available for higher 8-hour average O3
concentrations to use as a basis for
selecting 8-hour breakpoints and for
developing appropriate health effects
and cautionary statements. We believe
that since State and local agencies are
required to report the name of the
pollutant responsible for an index value
greater than 100, but not the associated
averaging period, using the 8-hour O3
sub-index should not be confusing in
areas that have not yet attained the 1-
hour O3 standard.
Regarding the issue of alerting
sensitive individuals below the level of
the 8-hour O3 standard, some
commenters not only suggested adding
a category below the level of the
standard, but also suggested reducing
the lower bound of the ‘‘moderate’’
category. (Docket No. A–98–20, IV–D–
11, IV–D–17, IV–D–19, IV–G–21). We
are not adding a category below the
level of the standard as discussed in
section II.B.1. above. However, to be
somewhat more precautionary, we have
expanded the ‘‘moderate’’ range by
reducing the lower bound of this
category from 0.070 ppm to 0.065 ppm
O3, 8-hour average. We believe that
setting the breakpoint between the
‘‘good’’ and ‘‘moderate’’ categories at
this lower level, is appropriate, based in
part on risk estimates done in
conjunction with the review of the O3
NAAQS which suggested that risk to
healthy people likely becomes
negligible at this level (Whitfield et al.,
1996). This change is also responsive to
comments from State agencies that the
proposed range of the ‘‘moderate’’
category was so narrow (spanning only
15 ppb O3, as compared to 20 ppb range
used in the Ozone Map in 1998) that it
would be more difficult to forecast
accurately and also would provide too
quick a transition from good to
unhealthy. (Docket No. A–98–20, IV–D–
10, IV–G–04). Conversely, an industry
group and a State commenter took
exception to issuing a ‘‘limited health
notice’’ for O3 that we proposed as the
purpose of the ‘‘moderate’’ category.
(Docket No. A–98–20, IV–D–12, IV–G–
14). The State commenter objected to
the use of the term ‘‘health notice’’
below the level of the standard because
it implies that the standard is not
protective of public health. In addition
to stating that the ‘‘limited health
notice’’ associated with moderate air
quality is inconsistent with the 8-hour
O3 standard because the standard is
intended to protect public health, even
the health of sensitive populations, with
an adequate margin of safety, the
industry commenter expressed the view
that we should omit from our materials
the health effects and cautionary
statements suggesting that air quality
meeting the level of the standard is a
threat to health. We agree with the
industry and State commenters that
since the 8-hour O3 standard is intended
to protect public health, including the
health of sensitive groups, with an
adequate margin of safety, that the term
‘‘limited health notice’’ may be
misleading. However, we continue to
believe that it is appropriate to provide
guidance with cautionary language for
extremely sensitive individuals, not
populations or groups, below the level
of the standard. This approach is
consistent with the advice of CASAC,
and the way we discussed expanding
the use of the AQI, specifically to
caution extremely sensitive individuals
below the level of the O3 standard, in
the O3 proposal and final decision
notices.
b. PM2.5 sub-index. We received a
number of comments regarding the
PM2.5 sub-index, almost all of them
focusing on our proposal to set the
index value of 100 at the level of the 24-
hour standard (65 µg/m3). Some
commenters recommended setting an
index value of 100, or otherwise
providing for cautionary messages, at
concentrations lower than 65 µg/m3.
One commenter, for example, stated that
under the proposal ‘‘many areas of the
country will likely violate the annual
standard of 15 µg/m3 without ever (or
hardly ever) reaching a PSI of 100 or a
category indicating some degree of
unhealthfulness. This situation will
result in an inconsistent and
inappropriate message to the public,
especially given the severe health effects
associated with fine particles.’’ (Docket
No. A–98–20, IV–D–11).
In light of these comments, we have
reexamined the basis for selecting PM2.5
AQI breakpoints and agree that the sub-
index as proposed would not adequately
caution sensitive groups about potential
risks associated with short-term
exposures to PM2.5. This is essentially
because the proposed PM2.5 sub-index
was developed using the Agency’s
historical approach to selecting index
breakpoints, which on examination does
not correspond well with the way the
PM2.5 standards were intended to
function. The historical practice has
been simply to set the AQI value of 100
at the level of the short-term standard
for a pollutant (in this case, the 24-hour
PM2.5 standard) and the AQI value of 50
at the level of the annual standard, if
there is one, or at one-half the level of
the short-term standard.8 This method
of structuring the index is appropriate
for a ‘‘typical’’ suite of air-quality
standards, which includes a short-term
standard designed to protect against the
health effects associated with short-term
exposures and an annual standard
designed to protect against health effects
associated with long-term exposures. In
such cases, the short-term standard in
effect defines the level of health
protection provided against short-term
risks and thus is a useful benchmark
against which to compare daily air-
quality concentrations.
In the case of the PM2.5 standards,
however, EPA took a different approach
to protecting against health risks
associated with short-term exposures.
For reasons discussed in the preamble
to the final standards, the annual and
24-hour PM2.5 standards were designed
to work together for this purpose, and
the intended level of protection against
short-term risk is not defined by the 24-
hour standard but by the combination of
the two standards working in concert.
Indeed, the annual PM2.5 level of 15 µg/
m3 was intended to serve as the
principal vehicle for protection against
short-term PM2.5 exposures (by reducing
the entire distribution of PM2.5
concentrations in an area), with the
short-term standard serving essentially
to provide supplemental protection in
special situations. 9 Given the respective
roles of the two standards, setting the
AQI value of 100 at the level of the 24-
hour standard would not reflect the
short-term health risks associated with
lower concentrations, which the annual
standard was designed to address.
Accordingly, we agree that it is
appropriate to caution members of
sensitive groups below the level of the
24-hour standard and believe this
should be done in a way that reflects the
intended roles of both standards in
protecting against short-term risks.
It would also be inappropriate to
compare daily air-quality concentrations
directly with the level of the annual
standard (by setting the AQI value of
100 at that level), because the annual
standard represents an average of many
daily concentrations rather than daily
values per se. In the circumstances, we
believe the guiding principle for PM2.5
should be to set the AQI value of 100
in a way that, at least conceptually,
reflects the general level of health
protection against short-term risks
42543
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
10 See 62 FR 38670, 38677 (July 18, 1997).
11 See 63 FR 67824, 67832 (Dec. 9, 1998).
12 As discussed in the proposal, should the final
SHL for PM2.5, when promulgated, be different from
this concentration, we will revise this PM2.5 sub-
index accordingly.
provided by the annual and 24-hour
standards in combination. This
approach, although inexact, is
consistent with the historical approach,
in that the underlying logic of that
approach, as applied to a typical suite
of standards, is also to set the AQI value
of 100 in a way that reflects the level of
protection provided against short-term
risks—that is, by setting it at the level
of the short-term standard that provides
the protection. In the case of PM2.5, as
indicated above, the level of the 24-hour
standard (65 µg/m3) is too high to reflect
the intended level of protection, and the
level of the annual standard (15 µg/m3)
is too low. Between the two values, the
available health studies indicate a
continuum of risks associated with
increasing PM concentrations, although
with significant uncertainties as to the
extent of the risk associated with single
peak exposures.10 Consistent with EPA’s
general practice of setting AQI
breakpoints in symmetrical fashion
where health effects information does
not suggest particular levels,11 we
concluded that it is appropriate to set
the AQI value of 100 at the mid-point
of the range between the annual and the
24-hour PM2.5 standards (40 µg/m3).
Given that decision, we also concluded
that it is appropriate to retain the level
of the annual standard for an AQI value
of 50, as proposed, and to set the AQI
level of 150 at the level of the 24-hour
standard.
To reiterate, the purpose of setting the
AQI value of 100 somewhat below the
level of the 24-hour standard was to
reflect the dual role of the annual and
24-hour PM2.5 standards in protecting
against short-term risks, and the aim
was to select a breakpoint that would
serve as a rough surrogate for the
general level of protection provided by
the two standards in combination.
Given the nature of the standards and
the available health information, a more
exact approach was not possible. In this
regard, setting the breakpoint at the
mid-point of the range between the
annual and 24-hour standards, as
opposed to a level somewhat higher or
lower within that range, simply
reflected EPA’s general practice of
setting symmetrical breakpoints as
indicated above, and does not imply any
sort of health-effects threshold. In
particular, it does not reflect a judgment
about the extent of the risk associated
with single peak concentrations of
PM2.5, as to which the available health
information is inconclusive, or the level
at which EPA might set a 24-hour
standard if the annual standard did not
serve as the primary vehicle for
protection against such concentrations.
As with other AQI breakpoints, it also
has no effect on the degree of control
required of specific sources.
In short, EPA’s decision to treat the
annual standard as the principal vehicle
for protecting against short-term PM2.5
concentrations, although judged to be
the best approach based on the available
health information, does present a
different situation than that involved in
previous AQI rulemakings. As discussed
in the preamble to the final standards,
the annual standard was intended to
reduce all PM2.5 concentrations,
including short-term peaks, in an area
sufficiently to protect public health with
an adequate margin of safety, aside from
special situations which the 24-hour
standard was designed to address. As
one commenter suggested, however, it
would be possible for an area to violate
the annual standard without ever
experiencing (or seldom experiencing)
daily peaks that exceeded the level of
the 24-hour standard. Moreover, it
might be difficult, if not impossible, to
predict in advance whether the annual
standard will be attained in a given area.
For these reasons, as well as the
uncertainties in the available health
information, it is inherently difficult to
judge the significance of single peak
concentrations when they occur. In
view of the various uncertainties
involved, particularly sensitive
individuals may wish to avoid exposure
to such concentrations, especially
concentrations that approach the level
of the 24-hour standard. To facilitate
such choices, consistent with the
purposes of the AQI and the advice of
CASAC, we believe that cautioning
members of sensitive groups in the
range of 40 to 65 µg/m3 is appropriate.
We did not receive any comments on
the proposal to establish a concentration
of 500 µg/m3 to be associated with a
PM2.5 index value of 500, or our method
of selecting the intermediate
breakpoints. Therefore, we are adopting
500 µg/m3 as the upper bound of the
index.12 For intermediate breakpoints in
the AQI between values of 150 and 500,
we have adopted PM2.5 concentrations
that generally reflect a linear
relationship between increasing index
values and increasing PM2.5 values. As
discussed in the proposal, the generally
linear relationship between AQI values
and PM2.5 concentrations in this range,
rounded to increments of 50 µg/m3 to
reflect the approximate nature of such a
relationship, is consistent with the
health effects evidence that was the
basis for the PM standards.
C. What Are the Final Revisions?
The sub-sections below only
summarize changes to the regulatory
text. They do not describe all aspects of
40 CFR part 58.50 or appendix G.
1. What Are the General Changes?
Based on the proposed structure of
the AQI, the comments we received and
our responses to them, as discussed
above, we are adopting the following
changes to the general structure and
reporting requirements to the AQI.
a. Categories and related descriptors,
index values and colors. We are
adopting the index values, descriptors
and associated colors listed in Table 1
above.
b. Reporting requirements. We are
revising 40 CFR 58.50 to require
reporting of the AQI in all MSAs with
a population over 350,000. In appendix
G, we are adopting rounding
conventions to be used to calculate
index values that are consistent with the
rounding conventions used in defining
the NAAQS for each pollutant.
The final rule retains the
requirements to identify the area for
which the AQI is being reported, the
time period covered by the report, the
‘‘critical’’ pollutant for which the
reported AQI value was derived, the
AQI value, and the associated category
descriptor. The final rule adds two
requirements: (1) To report the
associated category color if a color
format is used and, (2) to report the
pollutant-specific sensitive group for
any reported index value greater than
100. The final rule encourages, but does
not require, that AQI reports include:
appropriate health effects and
cautionary statements, all AQI values
greater than 100, the AQI for sub-
divisions of the MSA (if there are
important differences in air quality
across sub-divisions of the MSA),
possible causes for high index values,
and the actual pollutant concentrations.
In the case of rural or small urban
areas that are significantly affected by
pollutants transported from a MSA
where the AQI is reported, the final rule
recommends that the MSA report the
AQI for the affected areas as well. In
addition, when the AQI is greater than
100, reporting agencies should expand
AQI reporting to include all major news
media. The final rule continues to allow
agencies to discontinue reporting for
any pollutant, if index values for that
pollutant have been below 50 for an
entire season or a year. However, if in
subsequent years pollutant levels rise
42544
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
such that index values for that pollutant
would be above 50, then the final rule
requires that AQI reporting for that
pollutant resume. The final rule
emphasizes the importance of
forecasting the AQI by specifying that
forecasted values should be reported,
when possible, but does not require that
forecasted values be reported.
c. Index name. We are adopting the
name the Air Quality Index or AQI.
2. What Are the Changes to the Sub-
Indices?
Based on the proposed sub-indices,
the comments we received and our
responses to them, as discussed above,
we are adopting new sub-indices
corresponding to the 8-hour O3 standard
and the PM2.5 standards, as well as
conforming changes to the CO, 1-hour
O3, PM10, and SO2 sub-indices. The
adopted breakpoints for the O3 (8-hour
and 1-hour) PM2.5, PM10, CO and SO2
sub-indices are listed in Table 3.
TABLE 3.—BREAKPOINTS FOR O3, PM2.5, PM10, CO, AND SO2 SUB-INDICES
AQI value
O3
PM
CO, 8-hr (ppm)
SO2, 24-hr (ppm)
8-hr (ppm)
1-hr (ppm)
PM2.5, 24-hr
(µg/m3)
PM10, 24-hr
(µg/m3)
50 ................
0.06 .............
.................................
15
50
4
0.03
100 ..............
0.08 .............
0.12
40
150
9
0.14
150 ..............
0.10 .............
0.16
65
250
12
0.22
200 ..............
0.12 .............
0.20
* 150
350
15
0.30
300 ..............
0.40 (1-hr) ...
0.40
* 250
420
30
0.60
400 ..............
0.50 (1-hr) ...
0.50
* 350
500
40
0.80
500 ..............
0.60 (1-hr) ...
0.60
* 500
600
50
1.00
* If a different SHL for PM2.5 is promulgated, these numbers will be revised accordingly.
These sub-indices are presented in
more detail in appendix G to reflect the
changes to the numerical rounding
conventions for calculating index
values.
D. What Are the Related Informational
Materials?
The primary documents associated
with the AQI and this rulemaking, are
our guidance on AQI reporting,
‘‘Guideline for Public Reporting of Daily
Air Quality—Air Quality Index (AQI)’’
(EPA 1999a), and our guidance on AQI
forecasting, ‘‘Guideline for Developing
an Ozone Forecasting Program’’ (EPA
1999b). These documents are available
on AIRLINKS (http://www.epa.gov/
airlinks). The AQI Reporting document
contains information regarding the AQI
requirements and recommendations,
example AQI reports, and a list of MSAs
required to report the AQI. It also
includes pollutant-specific health
effects and cautionary statements for use
with the index, for O3, PM2.5, PM10, CO,
and SO2. The AQI Forecasting
document explains the steps necessary
to start an air pollution forecasting
program. Included in the document is
guidance on using hourly O3
concentrations as predictors for 8-hour
averages.
Other related informational materials
are also available. The brochure ‘‘The
Pollutant Standards Index’’ (EPA 1994)
contained general information about the
health effects and air quality, and
general precautions that sensitive
groups and the general public can take
to avoid exposures of concern. It is
being revised to be consistent with the
new name (i.e., the Air Quality Index
brochure), with final revisions to the
AQI, and will identify sensitive groups
in the health effects statements for each
of the pollutants, and include the
pollutant-specific health effects and
cautionary statements discussed above.
A colorful fact sheet, called the ‘‘Air
Quality Guide,’’ provides information
about the AQI, O3 health effects and the
sources of ground-level O3 is available
on the AIRNOW web site. A revised
booklet, ‘‘SMOG—Who Does It Hurt?,’’
provides information for the general
public about O3 health effects and is
based on scientific information gained
in the recent review of the O3 standard.
‘‘SMOG—Who Does It Hurt?’’ was
designed to provide, in simple language,
enough detail for individuals to
understand who is at most risk from O3
exposure and why, the nature of O3
health effects, and a detailed
explanation of how individuals can
reduce the likelihood of exposure using
common everyday activities as
examples. We are also developing a
shorter, summary pamphlet about O3
health effects to complement the
‘‘SMOG—Who Does It Hurt?’’ booklet.
We expect the AQI brochure, ‘‘SMOG—
Who Does It Hurt?’’ and the shorter
summary pamphlet about O3 health
effects to be available in paper format
and on the AIRNOW web site early in
the 1999 ozone season. In addition, we
will translate the Air Quality Guide, the
AQI brochure, ‘‘SMOG—Who Does It
Hurt?’’, and the shorter summary
pamphlet into Spanish. These materials
will be available on a Spanish page on
the AIRNOW web site.
There are other materials available on
the AIRNOW web site that provide
general information about O3.
Information about ground-level as
contrasted to stratospheric O3 may be
found in EPA’s publication ‘‘Ozone:
Good Up High, Bad Nearby.’’ The EPA’s
video, ‘‘Ozone Double Trouble’’ also
provides information about ground-level
and stratospheric O3 and the health
effects associated with exposure to
ground-level O3, or smog.
In addition to the products discussed
above, to address the concerns of
commenters that when air quality is in
the ‘‘unhealthy for sensitive groups’’
range the public will not understand
that the standard has been exceeded or
who is at risk, we are going to
significantly increase education and
outreach related to the AQI. At this
point, we are still in the process of
planning specific new products or
activities, but have decided what
general direction these efforts will take.
First, we plan to increase our contacts
with the news providers to better inform
them about the importance of including
accurate, timely and understandable
information in their broadcasts and
reporting, and to enlist them as full
partners in the implementation of the
AQI. Second, we plan to form new
associations with health care providers
to keep them informed about air
pollution health effects, since these
professionals are the most trusted
source of health effects information.
Third, we plan to increase direct
outreach to the public through a variety
of means, including materials tailored to
school-age children, the Spanish-
speaking community, and others.
Finally, we plan to work with public
health interest organizations to support
42545
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
their efforts to provide more immediate
and interactive education and outreach
to all of these groups.
III. Regulatory and Environmental
Impact Analyses
A. Executive Order 12866: OMB Review
of ‘‘Significant Actions’’
Under Executive Order 12866, the
Agency must determine whether a
regulatory action is ‘‘significant’’ and,
therefore, subject to Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) review
and the requirements of the Executive
Order. The order defines ‘‘significant
regulatory action’’ as one that may:
(1) Have an annual effect on the
economy of $100 million or more or
adversely affect in a material way the
economy, a sector of the economy,
productivity, competition, jobs, the
environment, public health or safety, or
State, local, or tribal governments or
communities;
(2) Create a serious inconsistency or
otherwise interfere with an action taken
or planned by another Agency;
(3) Materially alter the budgetary
impact of entitlements, grants, user fees,
or loan programs or the rights and
obligations or recipients thereof; or
(4) Raise novel legal or policy issues
arising out of legal mandates, the
President’s priorities, or the principles
set forth in the Executive Order. The
EPA has determined that the revisions
to air quality index reporting in this
final rule would not have an annual
effect on the economy of $100 million
or more or adversely affect in a material
way the economy, a sector of the
economy, productivity, competition,
jobs, the environment, public health or
safety, or State, local, or tribal
governments or communities, and
therefore did not prepare a regulatory
impact assessment. The OMB has
advised us this final decision should be
construed as a ‘‘significant regulatory
action’’ within the meaning of Executive
Order 12866. Accordingly, this action
was submitted to the OMB for review.
Any changes made in response to OMB
suggestions or recommendations will be
documented in the public record and
made available for public inspection at
EPA’s Air and Radiation Docket
Information Center (Docket No. A–98–
20).
B. Regulatory Flexibility Analysis/Small
Business Regulatory Enforcement
Fairness Act
Under the Regulatory Flexibility Act
(RFA), 5 U.S.C. 601 et seq., EPA must
prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis
assessing the impact of any proposed or
final rule on small entities. Under 6
U.S.C. 605(b), this requirement may be
waived if EPA certifies that the rule will
not have a significant economic impact
on a substantial number of small
entities. Small entities include small
businesses, small not-for-profit
enterprises, and governmental entities
with jurisdiction over populations less
than 50,000 people.
Today’s final decision to revise the
AQI program modifies existing air
quality reporting requirements for
MSA’s with populations over 350,000
people. Today’s final decision will not
establish any new regulatory
requirements affecting small entities. On
the basis of the above considerations,
EPA certifies that today’s final decision
will not have a significant economic
impact on a substantial number of small
entities within the meaning of the RFA.
Based on the same considerations, EPA
also certifies that the new small-entity
provisions in section 244 of the Small
Business Regulatory Enforcement
Fairness Act (SBREFA) do not apply.
C. Unfunded Mandates Reform Act
Title II of the Unfunded Mandates
Reform Act of 1995 (UMRA), Public
Law 104–4, establishes requirements for
Federal agencies to assess the effects of
their regulatory actions on State, local,
and tribal governments and the private
sector. Under section 202 of the UMRA,
EPA generally must prepare a written
statement, including a cost-benefit
analysis, for proposed and final rules
with ‘‘Federal mandates’’ that may
result in expenditures to State, local and
tribal governments, in the aggregate, or
to the private sector, of $100 million or
more in any 1 year. In addition, before
EPA establishes any regulatory
requirements that may significantly or
uniquely affect small governments,
including tribal governments, it must
have developed under section 203 of the
UMRA a small government agency plan.
The plan must provide for notifying
potentially affected small governments,
enabling officials of affected small
governments to have meaningful and
timely input in the development of EPA
regulatory proposals with significant
Federal intergovernmental mandates,
and informing, educating, and advising
small governments on compliance with
the regulatory requirements.
The EPA has determined that today’s
final decision would not include a
Federal mandate that may result in
estimated costs of $100 million in any
1 year to either State, local, or tribal
governments, in the aggregate, or to the
private sector. Accordingly, EPA has
determined that the provisions of
section 202 of the UMRA do not apply
to this rulemaking. With regard to
section 203 of the UMRA, EPA has
determined that this rule contains no
regulatory requirements that might
significantly or uniquely affect small
governments. This rule requires
reporting of the Air Quality Index only
in MSAs with populations greater than
350,000, and therefore does not affect
small governments.
D. Paperwork Reduction Act
Today’s final decision does not
establish any new information
collection requirements beyond those
which are currently required under the
Ambient Air Quality Surveillance
Regulations in 40 CFR part 58 (OMB
#2060–0084, EPA ICR No. 0940.15).
Therefore, the requirements of the
Paperwork Reduction Act do not apply
to today’s action.
E. Executive Order 13045: Children’s
Health
Executive Order 13045, entitled
‘‘Protection of Children from
Environmental Health Risks and Safety
Risks’’ (62 FR 19885, April 23, 1997),
requires Federal agencies to ensure that
their policies, programs, activities, and
standards identify and assess
environmental health and safety risks
that may disproportionately affect
children. To respond to this order,
agencies must explain why the
regulation is preferable to other
potentially effective and reasonably
feasible alternatives considered by the
agency. In today’s final decision, EPA
identified children as one of the
sensitive groups which may be at
increased risk of experiencing the
effects of concern following exposure to
O3, PM2.5 and NO2.5. The AQI categories,
descriptors, and health effects and
cautionary statements as proposed, for
the first time reflect consideration of the
increased health risk to children which
may result from such exposures.
Promulgation of the proposed AQI is
one potentially effective alternative that
was considered. However, based on
comments that the public may not be
aware that healthy, active children are
included in the sensitive groups for O3,
PM2.5 and NO2, we have adopted the
additional requirement that reporting
agencies must include a pollutant-
specific statement of the sensitive
groups when an index value of 100 is
exceeded. For example, when reporting
an AQI value of 110 for ozone, the
reporting agency must include a
statement that children and people with
asthma are the groups most at risk.
Whenever the AQI value is above 100
for a pollutant, and children are one of
the sensitive groups for that pollutant,
the AQI report must include a statement
42546
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
that children are at risk. Therefore,
today’s action does comply with the
requirements of E.O. 13045.
F. Executive Order 12848:
Environmental Justice
Executive Order 12848 requires that
each Federal agency make achieving
environmental justice part of its mission
by identifying and addressing, as
appropriate, disproportionately high
and adverse human health or
environmental effects of its programs,
policies, and activities on minorities
and low-income populations in the
United States.
The nature of today’s action is to
inform the general public, including
minorities and low-income populations,
about the nature of the air pollution in
the areas in which they live. Today’s
action establishes a uniform tool for
States to use to develop programs which
will caution particularly sensitive
people to minimize their exposures and
educate the public about general health
effects associated with exposure to
different pollution levels. States may
also use information established as part
of the AQI to trigger programs designed
to reduce emissions to avoid
exceedances of the NAAQS. Therefore,
today’s action will help facilitate public
participation, outreach, and
communication in areas where
environmental justice issues are present.
G. Executive Order 12875: Enhancing
Intergovernmental Partnerships
Under Executive Order 12875, EPA
may not issue a regulation that is not
required by statute and that creates a
mandate upon a State, local or tribal
government, unless the Federal
government provides the funds
necessary to pay the direct compliance
costs incurred by those governments, or
we will consult with those governments.
If EPA complies by consulting,
Executive Order 12875 requires us to
provide to OMB a description of the
extent of our prior consultation with
representatives of affected State, local
and tribal governments, the nature of
their concerns, copies of any written
communications from the governments,
and a statement supporting the need to
issue the regulation. In addition,
Executive Order 12875 requires us to
develop an effective process permitting
elected officials and other
representatives of State, local and tribal
governments ‘‘to provide meaningful
and timely input in the development of
regulatory proposals containing
significant unfunded mandates.’’
Today’s rule implements
requirements set forth in section 319 of
the Act and thus is required by statute.
This rule does not establish a wholly
new requirement but rather modifies
existing reporting requirements which
State and local governments have been
implementing for approximately 20
years. While these changes are
significant in many ways, they are not
expected to result in a significant
increase in reporting burdens.
Nonetheless, EPA engaged in extensive
consultation with State and local
governments in the development of the
proposed and final rules, and this
consultation is discussed and
documented elsewhere in today’s notice
and in the notice of proposed
rulemaking.
H. Executive Order 13084: Consultation
and Coordination With Indian Tribal
Governments
Under Executive Order 13084, EPA
may not issue a regulation that is not
required by statute, that significantly or
uniquely affects the communities of
Indian tribal governments, and that
imposes substantial direct compliance
costs on those communities, unless the
Federal government provides the funds
necessary to pay the direct compliance
costs incurred by the tribal
governments, or EPA will consult with
those governments. If EPA complies by
consulting, Executive Order 13084
requires us to provide to OMB, in a
separately identified section of the
preamble to the rule, a description of
the extent of our prior consultation with
representatives of affected tribal
governments, a summary of the nature
of their concerns, and a statement
supporting the need to issue the
regulation. In addition, Executive Order
13084 requires us to develop an
effective process permitting elected
officials and other representatives of
Indian tribal governments ‘‘to provide
meaningful and timely input in the
development of regulatory policies on
matters that significantly or uniquely
affect their communities.’’
Today’s rule implements
requirements specifically set forth by
the Congress in section 319 of the Act
without the exercise of any discretion
by us. Accordingly, the requirements of
section 3(b) of Executive Order 13084
do not apply to this rule.
This rule governs the reporting of air
quality by States for MSAs and, in some
cases, areas that are significantly
affected by transport of pollutants from
MSAs. In extensive public and
intergovermental coordination efforts
during the development of the proposal,
EPA received no information which
would suggest that the rule will impose
new requirements on Indian tribal
governments nor will it significantly or
uniquely affect communities of Indian
tribal governments. To the extent that
air pollution from upwind MSAs
significantly affects any lands within
Indian country, this impact is not a
result of, or affected by, today’s rule and
would be addressed under existing
requirements governing the
implementation of air quality standards.
I. National Technology Transfer and
Advancement Act
Section 12(d) of the National
Technology Transfer and Advancement
Act of 1995 (NTTAA), Public Law 104–
113, section 12(d) (15 U.S.C. 272 note)
directs EPA to use voluntary consensus
standards in its regulatory activities
unless to do so would be inconsistent
with applicable law or otherwise
impractical. Voluntary consensus
standards are technical standards (e.g.,
materials specifications, test methods,
sampling procedures, and business
practices) that are developed or adopted
by voluntary consensus standards
bodies. The NTTAA directs EPA to
provide Congress, through OMB,
explanations when the Agency decides
not to use available and applicable
voluntary consensus standards. This
action does not involve technical
standards. Therefore, EPA did not
consider the use of any voluntary
consensus standards.
J. Congressional Review Act
The Congressional Review Act, 5
U.S.C. 801 et seq., as added by the Small
Business Regulatory Enforcement
Fairness Act of 1996, generally provides
that before a rule may take effect, the
agency promulgating the rule must
submit a rule report, which includes a
copy of the rule, to each House of the
Congress and to the Comptroller General
of the United States. The EPA will
submit a report containing this rule and
other required information to the U.S.
Senate, the U.S. House of
Representatives, and the Comptroller
General of the United States prior to the
publication of the rule in the Federal
Register. This rule is not a ‘‘major rule’’
as defined by 5 U.S.C. 804(2).
IV. References
CEQ, (1976) A Recommended Air Pollution
Index, report prepared by the Federal
Interagency Task Force on Air Quality
Indicators, Council on Environmental
Quality, Environmental Protection
Agency, and Department of Commerce.
EPA, (1994) Measuring Air Quality: The
Pollutant Standards Index, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Office
of Air Quality Planning and Standards
(MD–10), Research Triangle Park, NC,
27711, EPA 451/K–94–001.
42547
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
EPA, (1999a) Guideline for Public Reporting
of Daily Air Quality—Air Quality Index
(AQI), U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, Office of Air Quality Planning
and Standards, Research Triangle Park,
NC, 27711, EPA–454/R–99–010.
EPA, (1999b) Guideline for Developing an
Ozone Forecasting Program, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Office
of Air Quality Planning and Standards,
Research Triangle Park, NC, 27711, EPA–
454/R–99–009.
EPA, (1999c) The Air Quality Index, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Office
of Air Quality Planning and Standards,
Research Triangle Park, NC, 27711, in
preparation.
Science Applications International
Corporation, (1998) Report of Eight
Focus Groups on the Ozone Map, the
Pollutant Standards Sub-index for
Ozone, and the Ozone Health Effects
Booklet, Science Applications
International Corporation, McLean, VA.
U.S. Department of Commerce, (1998)
Statistical Abstract of the United States,
U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Whitfield, R.G.; Biller, W.F.; Jusko, M.J.;
Keisler, JM (1996) A probabilistic
assessment of health risks associated
with short-term exposure to tropospheric
ozone. Report prepared for U.S. EPA,
OAQPS. Argonne National Laboratory;
Argonne, IL.
Wolff, G.T., (1995) Letter from Chairman of
the Clean Air Scientific Advisory
Committee to the EPA Administrator,
dated November 30, 1995. EPA–SAB–
CASAC–LTR–96–002.
List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 58
Environmental protection, Air
pollution control, Intergovernmental
relations, Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements.
Dated: July 23, 1999.
Carol M. Browner,
Administrator.
Accordingly, 40 CFR part 58 is
amended as follows:
PART 58—AMBIENT AIR QUALITY
SURVEILLANCE
1. The authority citation for part 58
continues to read as follows:
Authority: 42 U.S.C. 7410, 7601(a), 7613,
and 7619.
2. Section 58.50 is revised to read as
follows:
§ 58.50
Index reporting.
(a) The State shall report to the
general public through prominent notice
an air quality index in accordance with
the requirements of appendix G to this
part.
(b) Reporting is required by all
Metropolitan Statistical Areas with a
population exceeding 350,000.
(c) The population of a Metropolitan
Statistical Area for purposes of index
reporting is the most recent decennial
U.S. census population.
3. Appendix G to part 58 is revised to
read as follows:
Appendix G to Part 58—Uniform Air
Quality Index (AQI) and Daily
Reporting
General Requirements
1. What is the AQI?
2. Why report the AQI?
3. Must I report the AQI?
4. What goes into my AQI report?
5. Is my AQI report for my MSA only?
6. How do I get my AQI report to the
public?
7. How often must I report the AQI?
8. May I make exceptions to these reporting
requirements?
Calculation
9. How does the AQI relate to air pollution
levels?
10. Where do I get the pollutant
concentrations to calculate the AQI?
11. Do I have to forecast the AQI?
12. How do I calculate the AQI?
Background and Reference Materials
13. What additional information should I
know?
General Requirements
1. What Is the AQI?
The AQI is a tool that simplifies reporting
air quality to the general public. The AQI
incorporates into a single index
concentrations of 5 criteria pollutants: ozone
(O3), particulate matter (PM), carbon
monoxide (CO), sulfur dioxide (SO2), and
nitrogen dioxide (NO2). The scale of the
index is divided into general categories that
are associated with health messages.
2. Why Report the AQI?
The AQI offers various advantages:
a. It is simple to create and understand.
b. It conveys the health implications of air
quality.
c. It promotes uniform use throughout the
country.
3. Must I Report the AQI?
You must report the AQI daily if yours is
a metropolitan statistical area (MSA) with a
population over 350,000.
4. What Goes Into My AQI Report?
i. Your AQI report must contain the
following:
a. The reporting area(s) (the MSA or
subdivision of the MSA).
b. The reporting period (the day for which
the AQI is reported).
c. The critical pollutant (the pollutant with
the highest index value).
d. The AQI (the highest index value).
e. The category descriptor and index value
associated with the AQI and, if you choose
to report in a color format, the associated
color. Use only the following descriptors and
colors for the six AQI categories:
TABLE 1.—AQI CATEGORIES
For this AQI
Use this
descriptor
And this
color 1
0 to 50 ..............
‘‘Good’’ .............
Green.
51 to 100 ..........
‘‘Moderate’’ .......
Yellow.
101 to 150 ........
‘‘Unhealthy for
Sensitive
Groups’’.
Orange.
151 to 200 ........
‘‘Unhealthy’’ ......
Red.
201 to 300 ........
‘‘Very
Unhealthy’’.
Purple.
301 and above
‘‘Hazardous’’ ....
Ma-
roon.1
1 Specific colors can be found in the most
recent reporting guidance (Guideline for Public
Reporting of Daily Air Quality—Air Quality
Index (AQI)).
f. The pollutant specific sensitive groups
for any reported index value greater than 100.
Use the following sensitive groups for each
pollutant:
When this pollutant has an index value above 100 * * *
Report these sensitive groups * * *
Ozone .......................................................................................................
Children and people with asthma are the groups most at risk.
PM2.5 .........................................................................................................
People with respiratory or heart disease, the elderly and children are
the groups most at risk.
PM10 ..........................................................................................................
People with respiratory disease are the group most at risk.
CO .............................................................................................................
People with heart disease are the group most at risk.
SO2 ...........................................................................................................
People with asthma are the group most at risk.
42548
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
When this pollutant has an index value above 100 * * *
Report these sensitive groups * * *
NO2 ...........................................................................................................
Children and people with respiratory disease are the groups most at
risk.
ii. When appropriate, your AQI report may
also contain the following:
a. Appropriate health and cautionary
statements.
b. The name and index value for other
pollutants, particularly those with an index
value greater than 100.
c. The index values for sub-areas of your
MSA.
d. Causes for unusual AQI values.
e. Actual pollutant concentrations.
5. Is My AQI Report for My MSA Only?
Generally, your AQI report applies to your
MSA only. However, if a significant air
quality problem exists (AQI greater than 100)
in areas significantly impacted by your MSA
but not in it (for example, O3 concentrations
are often highest downwind and outside an
urban area), you should identify these areas
and report the AQI for these areas as well.
6. How Do I Get My AQI Report to the Public?
You must furnish the daily report to the
appropriate news media (radio, television,
and newspapers). You must make the daily
report publicly available at one or more
places of public access, or by any other
means, including a recorded phone message,
a public Internet site, or facsimile
transmission. When the AQI value is greater
than 100, it is particularly critical that the
reporting to the various news media be as
extensive as possible. At a minimum, it
should include notification to the media with
the largest market coverages for the area in
question.
7. How Often Must I Report the AQI?
You must report the AQI at least 5 days per
week. Exceptions to this requirement are in
section 8 of this appendix.
8. May I Make Exceptions to These Reporting
Requirements?
i. If the index value for a particular
pollutant remains below 50 for a season or
year, then you may exclude the pollutant
from your calculation of the AQI in section
12.
ii. If all index values remain below 50 for
a year, then you may report the AQI at your
discretion. In subsequent years, if pollutant
levels rise to where the AQI would be above
50, then the AQI must be reported as
required in sections 3, 4, 6, and 7 of this
appendix.
Calculation
9. How Does the AQI Relate to Air Pollution
Levels?
For each pollutant, the AQI transforms
ambient concentrations to a scale from 0 to
500. The AQI is keyed as appropriate to the
national ambient air quality standards
(NAAQS) for each pollutant. In most cases,
the index value of 100 is associated with the
numerical level of the short-term standard
(i.e., averaging time of 24-hours or less) for
each pollutant. Different approaches are
taken for NO2, for which no short-term
standard has been established, and for PM2.5,
for which the annual standard is the
principal vehicle for protecting against short-
term concentrations. The index value of 50
is associated with the numerical level of the
annual standard for a pollutant, if there is
one, at one-half the level of the short-term
standard for the pollutant, or at the level at
which it is appropriate to begin to provide
guidance on cautionary language. Higher
categories of the index are based on
increasingly serious health effects and
increasing proportions of the population that
are likely to be affected. The index is related
to other air pollution concentrations through
linear interpolation based on these levels.
The AQI is equal to the highest of the
numbers corresponding to each pollutant.
For the purposes of reporting the AQI, the
sub-indexes for PM10 and PM2.5 are to be
considered separately. The pollutant
responsible for the highest index value (the
reported AQI) is called the ‘‘critical’’
pollutant.
10. Where Do I Get the Pollutant
Concentrations To Calculate the AQI?
You must use concentration data from
population-oriented State/Local Air
Monitoring Station (SLAMS) or parts of the
SLAMS required under 40 CFR 58.20 for
each pollutant except PM. For PM, you need
only calculate and report the AQI on days for
which you have measured air quality data
(e.g., particulate monitors often report values
only every sixth day). You may use
particulate measurements from monitors that
are not reference or equivalent methods (for
example, continuous PM10 or PM2.5 monitors)
if you can relate these measurements by
statistical linear regression to reference or
equivalent method measurements.
11. Do I Have to Forecast the AQI?
You should forecast the AQI to provide
timely air quality information to the public,
but this is not required. If you choose to
forecast the AQI, then you may consider both
long-term and short-term forecasts. You can
forecast the AQI at least 24-hours in advance
using the most accurate and reasonable
procedures considering meteorology,
topography, availability of data, and
forecasting expertise. The document
‘‘Guideline for Developing an Ozone
Forecasting Program’’ (the Forecasting
Guidance) will help you start a forecasting
program. You can also issue short-term
forecasts by predicting 8-hour ozone values
from 1-hour ozone values using methods
suggested in the Reporting Guidance,
‘‘Guideline for Public Reporting of Daily Air
Quality.’’
12. How Do I Calculate the AQI?
i. The AQI is the highest value calculated
for each pollutant as follows:
a. Identify the highest concentration among
all of the monitors within each reporting area
and truncate the pollutant concentration to
one more than the significant digits used to
express the level of the NAAQS for that
pollutant. This is equivalent to the rounding
conventions used in the NAAQS.
b. Using Table 2, find the two breakpoints
that contain the concentration.
c. Using Equation 1, calculate the index.
d. Round the index to the nearest integer.
TABLE 2.—BREAKPOINTS FOR THE AQI
These breakpoints
Equal these AQIs
* * *
Category
O3 (ppm)
8-hour
O3 (ppm)
1-hour 1
PM2.5
(µg/m3)
PM10
(µg/m3)
CO (ppm)
SO2 (ppm)
NO2 (ppm)
AQI
0.000–0.064 .............
......................
0.0–15.4
0–54
0.0–4.4
0.000–0.034
( 2)
0–50
Good.
0.065–0.084 .............
......................
15.5–40.4
55–154
4.5–9.4
0.035–0.144
( 2)
51–100 Moderate.
0.085–0.104 .............
0.125–0.164
40.5–65.4
155–254
9.5–12.4
0.145–0.224
( 2)
101–150 Unhealthy for sen-
sitive groups.
0.105–0.124 .............
0.165–0.204
4 65.5–150.4
255–354
12.5–15.4
0.225–0.304
( 2)
151–200 Unhealthy.
0.125–0.374 .............
0.205–0.404
4 150.5–250.4
355–424
15.5–30.4
0.305–0.604
0.65–1.24
201–300 Very unhealthy.
( 3) ............................
0.405–0.504
4 250.5–350.4
425–504
30.5–40.4
0.605–0.804
1.25–1.64
301–400
( 3) ............................
0.505–0.604
4 350.5–500.4
505–604
40.5–50.4
0.805–1.004
1.65–2.04
401–500 Hazardous.
1 Areas are generally required to report the AQI based on 8-hour ozone values. However, there are a small number of areas where an AQI
based on 1-hour ozone values would be more precautionary. In these cases, in addition to calculating the 8-hour ozone index value, the 1-hour
ozone index value may be calculated, and the maximum of the two values reported.
42549
Federal Register / Vol. 64, No. 149 / Wednesday, August 4, 1999 / Rules and Regulations
2 NO2 has no short-term NAAQS and can generate an AQI only above an AQI value of 200.
3 8-hour O3 values do not define higher AQI values (≥ 301). AQI values of 301 or higher are calculated with 1-hour O3 concentrations.
4 If a different SHL for PM2.5 is promulgated, these numbers will change accordingly.
ii. If the concentration is equal to a
breakpoint, then the index is equal to the
corresponding index value in Table 2.
However, Equation 1 can still be used. The
results will be equal. If the concentration is
between two breakpoints, then calculate the
index of that pollutant with Equation 1. You
must also note that in some areas, the AQI
based on 1-hour O3 will be more
precautionary than using 8-hour values (see
footnote 1 to Table 2). In these cases, you
may use 1-hour values as well as 8-hour
values to calculate index values and then use
the maximum index value as the AQI for O3.
I
I
I
BP
BP
C
BP
I
p
Hi
Lo
HI
Lo
p
Lo
Lo
=
−
−
−
(
) +
(Equation 1)
Where:
Ip = the index value for pollutantp
Cp = the truncated concentration of
pollutantp
BPHi = the breakpoint that is greater than or
equal to Cp
BPLo = the breakpoint that is less than or
equal to Cp
IHi = the AQI value corresponding to BPHi
Ilo = the AQI value corresponding to BPLo.
iii. If the concentration is larger than the
highest breakpoint in Table 2 then you may
use the last two breakpoints in Table 2 when
you apply Equation 1.
Example
iv. Using Table 2 and Equation 1, calculate
the index value for each of the pollutants
measured and select the one that produces
the highest index value for the AQI. For
example, if you observe a PM10 value of 210
µg/m3, a 1-hour O3 value of 0.156 ppm, and
an 8-hour O3 value of 0.130 ppm, then do
this:
a. Find the breakpoints for PM10 at 210 µg/
m3 as 155 µg/m3 and 254 µg/m3,
corresponding to index values 101 and 150;
b. Find the breakpoints for 1-hour O3 at
0.156 ppm as 0.125 ppm and 0.164 ppm,
corresponding to index values 101 and 150;
c. Find the breakpoints for 8-hour O3 at
0.130 ppm as 0.125 ppm and 0.374 ppm,
corresponding to index values 201 and 300;
d. Apply Equation 1 for 210 µg/m3, PM10:
150
101
254
155 210
155
101
128
−
−
−
(
) +
=
.
e. Apply Equation 1 for 0.156 ppm, 1-hour
O3:
150
101
0164
0125 0156
0125
101
140
−
−
−
(
) +
=
.
.
.
.
f. Apply Equation 1 for 0.130 ppm, 8-hour
O3:
300
201
0 374
0125 0130
0125
201
203
−
−
−
(
) +
=
.
.
.
.
g. Find the maximum, 203. This is the AQI.
The minimal AQI report would read:
v. Today, the AQI for my city is 203 which
is very unhealthy, due to ozone. Children
and people with asthma are the groups most
at risk.
Background and Reference Materials
13. What Additional Information Should I
Know?
The EPA has developed a computer
program to calculate the AQI for you. The
program works with Windows 95, it prompts
for inputs, and it displays all the pertinent
information for the AQI (the index value,
color, category, sensitive group, health
effects, and cautionary language). The EPA
has also prepared a brochure on the AQI that
explains the index in detail (The Air Quality
Index), Reporting Guidance (Guideline for
Public Reporting of Daily Air Quality) that
provides associated health effects and
cautionary statements, and Forecasting
Guidance (Guideline for Developing an
Ozone Forecasting Program) that explains the
steps necessary to start an air pollution
forecasting program. You can download the
program and the guidance documents at
www.epa.gov/airnow.
[FR Doc. 99–19433 Filed 8–3–99; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 6560–50–P
