 Hello, I'm Amy Padula and I'm a postdoctoral fellow at Stanford University in the Department of Pediatrics and I work with colleagues at UC Berkeley on the Children's Health and Air Pollution Study. The study evaluates the associations between air pollution and children's health outcomes, including asthma and birth outcomes. Today I'm going to talk about traffic-related air pollution and preterm birth. Just to give you an idea of what I'm going to talk about today, so I'm going to focus on prematurity. Most of the studies that are done on air pollution and pre-mature, look at preterm birth as a dichotomous outcome. So births before 37 weeks gestation. But preterm is not just a single problem or a single disease and we know there's a continuum of severity of preterm beyond just this 37 week cutoff. So we decided to look at several levels of prematurity to address this problem. We now talk about cumulative impacts and when I think of cumulative impacts, my mom goes in a few different areas and I think many of the speakers yesterday talked about them. So the first thing I'm going to talk about is effect modification by neighborhood socioeconomic status and talk about the social factors and their influence on health outcomes. And this gets to the idea of double jeopardy term that Rachel Morales-Frasch has used to explain the impact of both traffic or of any kind of environmental stressor along with social stressors having an even stronger impact on health outcomes. Then I'm going to talk about our multi-pollutin score which is a very simple yet informative way of looking at multiple pollutants rather than just individually. I'm going to briefly mention some implications for policy change and just wrap up with some of my plans for future studies. So just to give you an idea of our study population, we used the births between 2000 and 2006 and the four most populous counties in the San Joaquin Valley. And this was more than 300,000 births, about 12% of which were pre-term using that less than 37 weeks gestation definition but I'll go into more detail in a minute about how we categorize them further. We used covariates from the birth certificate as well as some from the census at the block group level to get at that neighborhood socioeconomic status so things like unemployment and public assistance income and families below the poverty level. And exposures were assigned based on geocoded maternal residences. So we used multiple air pollutant monitors that the US EPA has set up to calculate people's exposure during pregnancy and then we've also averaged those out over each trimester to see if there is a critical period for pre-term birth in terms of exposure. And then also looked at traffic density which was distance decayed annual average traffic volumes and that was done over the entire pregnancy. So our research question is what is the association between traffic related air pollution and pre-term birth and on the left here are exposures, carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, particulate matter less than 10 and 2.5 micrometers and traffic density within a 300 meter radius. And then our outcomes were gestational ages at these different groups. So 34 to 36 weeks which is often referred to as late pre-term and also consists of the majority of pre-terms 8% of our study population and then 32 to 33 weeks 28 to 31 and 20 to 27. And even though this bottom group of 20 to 27 weeks gestation accounts for less than 1%, it still includes almost 2,000 births so just to remind you of our sample size. And here are some of the results that really stood out to me as we were looking through. So we looked at each trimester and each pollutant for each category of pre-term birth. So these results are for that second trimester of exposure. And it's comparing the highest quartile of each pollutant to the bottom three quartiles. And as you can see the odds ratios that are bolded are statistically significant. I left out the confidence interval so that there wouldn't be too many numbers up here. But one thing I want to point out is that the odds increase for each category of pre-term. So the more there were stronger associations between pollutants and pre-term as we got into earlier and earlier gestational levels. And these are pretty strong odds for that early pre-term group. And I get also these were all adjusted for the kind of usual suspects on the birth certificate for potential confounding maternal age, education, race, birth weight, and so forth. One more thing I wanted to say here is that so particulate matter was the odds were particularly strong, no pun intended. But in this next slide shows the results for PM10. And this shows it across all three trimesters. So the second trimester were those numbers that I just showed you. But as you can see the first and third trimester were a little bit more variable. And so here on the y-axis are the odds ratios. Here's one. And there is an increase in in risk of those early pre-term births, the 20 to 27-weeks, for both the first and second trimester of exposure. The third wasn't calculated because the births were so early they didn't have a third trimester. And you can see the rest here. And then this next slide is the same graph but for PM2.5. And a similar pattern and the second trimester is really standing out here. So now I want to switch gears a little bit and talk about cumulative impacts and start with the social factors. And this is looking at both the physical environment and the social environment together and how they influence pre-term birth. And this table are the results for birth at that 20 to 27 weeks. So this is the earliest category of pre-term birth and exposures during the second trimester. And these results are stratified by low socioeconomic status. And so this indicator of low socioeconomic status at the neighborhood level was given for women who lived within a block group that had more than 10% unemployment, more than 15% income from public assistance, and more than 20% of families living below the poverty level. And as you can see the odds are much stronger for pre-term birth for early pre-term birth for all of the pollutants among this group of in the low neighborhood socioeconomic status. And this is compared to the non-LOSS. So although everybody has this risk it is stronger in this group. And although this is consistent with our hypothesis, even I'm not used to odds ratios this large so I was struck by these results. And now just also to talk about the multiple pollutants for a minute. So although we regulate the pollutants at on individually and generally study them individually we're exposed to them in mixtures. So we created a pollutant score and it was just the number of pollutants that someone was exposed to that highest quartile of each pollutant. So and here's the distribution of our pollutant scores. So 41% of the people were in the lowest three quartiles for all of the pollutants and 3% were in the highest quartile for all of them and then it broke down as you can see here. And here's our results for the multi-pollutant score during that second trimester. And so using zero as our reference those in the lowest quartile for all pollutants there's an increased risk for for each group. So one the null is down here at this bottom line and there's an increase both in the number of pollutants. There's an increase in odds of preterm as you increase the number of pollutants for which you're in that high category. And then also the risk is increased across the categories of preterm. So the more severe preterm the stronger the association. So I'm not sure if you can read this but the green x's are the 20 to 27-weeks and the red ones here are those late preterm. These results in general that I've talked about today are consistent with the literature for the most part. There aren't very many studies on this early preterm but here are a few that have found associations between air pollution and this early preterm they've been in different geographic areas and smaller sample sizes but are certainly notable. So in Los Angeles and Vancouver and in Japan they've all found associations with traffic related air pollution and preterm birth. And also I wanted to point out that some previous studies have also found low neighborhood socioeconomic status as an effect modifier with a little bit more variable results but so some have found it stronger in that low socioeconomic status group. One of these studies found it in the kind of counterintuitive direction that those with more education actually had stronger effects. And I will just wrap up with this final slide. So just to go over the cumulative impacts we found associations that are stronger for those in the low neighborhood socioeconomic group and we also found that multiple pollutants that those exposed to multiple pollutants at high levels had stronger effects. And I think in terms of policy implication this just adds to the list of health outcomes which are associated with traffic related air pollution and reminds us that protecting those most vulnerable in terms of socioeconomically vulnerable populations that they're in most need of being protected. And in terms of future studies we do plan to incorporate more data on socioeconomic stressors and we're in the process of gathering more data. And then I'd also like to to link these data with further medical data so that we can separate these preterm births and know kind of the pathways and the mechanisms of pre-maturedity that may be due to air pollution. So I just want to thank my collaborators and also our funders, the EPA and the NIH has.