 
AIR WE 
CLIMATE CHANGE DECREASES 
BRE
THE QU
A
ALIT
THE 
Y OF THE
Climate change poses many risks to human health. Some health impacts of climate 
change are already being felt in the United States. We need to safeguard our communities 
by protecting people’s health, wellbeing, and quality of life from climate change impacts. 
Many communities are already taking steps to address these public health issues and 
reduce the risk of harm. skull and cross bones in a cloud
BACKGROUND 
When we burn fossil fuels, such as coal and gas, we release carbon dioxide (CO2). CO2 builds up in the atmosphere 
and causes Earth’s temperature to rise, much like a blanket traps in heat. This extra trapped heat disrupts many 
of the interconnected systems in our environment. 
 
Climate change might also aﬀect human health by making our air less healthy to breathe. Higher temperatures 
lead to an increase in allergens and harmful air pollutants. For instance, longer warm seasons can mean longer 
pollen seasons – which can increase allergic sensitizations and asthma episodes and diminish productive work 
and school days. Higher temperatures associated with climate change can 
also lead to an increase in ozone, a harmful air pollutant. 
THE CLIMATE-HEALTH 
CONNECTION 
Decreased air quality introduces a number of health risks and concerns: 
According to the National Climate Assessment, climate change will 
aﬀect human health by increasing ground-level ozone and/or particulate 
matter air pollution in some locations. Ground-level ozone (a key component of smog) is associated with 
many health problems, including diminished lung function, increased hospital admissions and 
emergency department visits for asthma, and increases in premature deaths. 
More and larger wildﬁres linked to climate change could also signiﬁcantly reduce air quality and aﬀect 
people’s health in a number of ways. Smoke exposure increases acute (or sudden onset) respiratory 
illness, respiratory and cardiovascular hospitalizations, and medical visits for lung illnesses. The frequency 
of wildﬁres is expected to increase as drought conditions become more prevalent. 
Exposure to allergens causes health problems for many people. When sensitive individuals are simultaneously 
exposed to allergens and air pollutants, allergic reactions often become more severe. The increase in air 
pollutants makes the eﬀects of increased allergens associated with climate change even worse. People 
with existing pollen allergies may have increased risk for acute respiratory eﬀects. a figure wearing a face mask and a fire in the background
ACTIONS WE CAN TAKE TO
PREPARE FOR CLIMATE CHANGE 
We can responsibly manage the problems facing our environment by taking sensible steps toward protecting 
human health and safety. Whether measures are meant to reduce future climate change impacts or to 
address the health impacts of climate change that are happening already, early action provides the greatest 
health beneﬁts. It makes sense to invest in creating the strongest climate-health adaptation and preparedness 
programs we can. 
Reducing the release of heat-trapping gases like CO2 can help protect our health and wellbeing by decreasing 
impacts on our climate system. Activities that reduce the amount of heat-trapping CO2 in the atmosphere are 
many of the same things we already know prevent health problems. Active modes of transport like biking or 
walking can help reduce traﬃc-related air pollution and encourage physical activity, which has public health 
beneﬁts including reduced rates of obesity, heart disease, and diabetes. 
ACTIONS WE CAN TAKE TO PREPARE
FOR CLIMATE CHANGE’S IMPACT ON 
AIR QUALITY 
We also need to take action to make our communities less vulnerable to climate change impacts already in 
progress. Many communities are already addressing climate-sensitive health issues. When it comes to 
managing the health threats associated with air quality, a variety of eﬀective public health responses are 
available. 
The U.S. En
public quick
online and t
exposure b
People with
Transportat
reduce vehi
Air quality 
area that st
vironmental Protection Agency’s Air Quality Index (Airnow.gov) is a tool that helps the  
ly learn when air quality is likely to reach unhealthy levels. These forecasts, shared  
hrough local TV stations, radio programs and newspapers, help individuals reduce their  
y altering the type and location of their physical activity.  
 pollen allergies can limit their outdoor physical activity on days with high pollen counts. 
ion and land-use planning decisions that incorporate active modes of transportation can  
cle miles traveled and lower traﬃc-related air pollution.  
monitoring and tracking initiatives can pinpoint connections between air pollution in an  
atewide or national data might not reveal. For example, the New York State Environmental  
Health Tracking Program helped New York identify local connections between ground-level ozone  
and hospitalizations for respiratory illness in children.  a kull and cross bones in a cloudAmerican public health association and CDC logos
U.S Department of 
Health and Human Services 
Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention 
This document was funded through cooperative agreement U38OT000131 between the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the American Public Health Association. The contents of this document are solely the responsibility of the authors 
and do not necessarily represent the official views of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention or the American Public Health Association. 
