Protect Yourself
You’re exposed to pollution any time you breathe polluted air. But when 
you exercise, do yard work or other strenuous activities that increase 
your breathing rate, you take more pollution into your lungs. 
You can reduce your exposure by using AQI forecasts to help you 
plan your day. When the forecast calls for elevated levels of pollution, 
protect your health by reducing your exposure – especially if you are in 
a sensitive group.
How do you reduce your exposure when air quality is poor? Reschedule 
strenuous activities for times when air quality is expected to be better.  
Take it a little easier. You can cut back on vigorous activities, such as 
walking instead of jogging. These small changes can help you protect 
your lungs and heart.
Get Your Local AQI Forecast
You can find your local forecast by logging on to EPA’s AIRNow Web 
page at www.airnow.gov. Once on this site, you can also sign up for 
EnviroFlash, an e-mail and pager notification service that alerts you 
when your local air quality reaches certain levels. EnviroFlash gives 
instant air quality information that you can customize for your own 
needs, allowing you to take steps to protect the health of you and your 
family. 
If you have limited Internet access, you’ll find that many local television 
stations, radio stations and newspapers also carry local AQI forecasts.
EPA-456/F-07-002
February 2007
For more real-time information on air quality visit:
 www.airnow.gov
AQI Forecasts:
Your Advance Notification About Unhealthy Air
The Air Quality Index (AQI): As Important as 
Checking the Weather
You probably check the weather forecast every day. After all, it’s a 
useful tool that helps you plan what to wear and lets you know if you 
need to carry an umbrella. But there’s another forecast you should be 
checking, too -- the AQI. It can help you plan activities that protect your 
health.
How the AQI Works
Meteorologists in state and local air quality agencies develop AQI 
forecasts using actual air quality data, along with weather forecast 
information.  These forecasts are then translated into a simple color-
coded key that tells you how healthy or unhealthy the air is. Everyone 
may begin to experience health effects on a red air quality day.
Color
AQI
Health Message
Green
Good
Air quality is considered satisfactory, and air 
pollution poses little or no risk. 
Yellow
Moderate
Air quality is acceptable; however, for some 
pollutants there may be a moderate health 
concern for a very small number of people 
who are unusually sensitive to air pollution. 
Orange
Unhealthy 
for Sensitive 
Groups
Members of sensitive groups may experience 
health effects. The general public is not likely 
to be affected. 
Red
Unhealthy
Everyone may begin to experience health 
effects; members of sensitive groups may 
experience more serious health effects. 
Purple
Very Unhealthy
Health alert: everyone may experience more 
serious health effects. 
Maroon
Hazardous
Health warnings of emergency conditions. 
The entire population is more likely to be 
affected. 
What Does the AQI Tell Me?
The AQI is a fast and effective way to let you know:
what today’s air pollution levels will be in your community;
who is at risk from that pollution; and 
simple steps you can take to protect yourself.
 
Ground-level ozone and particle pollution are two of the most common 
air pollutants; the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, state and local 
agencies often provide separate forecasts for each of them.
Ground-Level Ozone
Ground-level ozone is formed when pollutants emitted by vehicles, 
power plants and industrial plants react in the presence of sunlight, 
usually during the summer. Ozone aggravates asthma and other 
respiratory diseases, and can make it difficult for you to breathe 
as deeply as you normally would. Ground-level ozone can also 
permanently change the structure of your lungs.
Particle Pollution
Unlike summertime ozone, particle pollution can occur year round.
Particle pollution comes from a wide range of sources, including 
power plants, cars and trucks, wood stoves and forest fires. Airborne, 
microscopic particles can get deep into your lungs and aggravate 
heart and lung disease. Symptoms can include coughing, wheezing, 
shortness of breath, and unusual fatigue. In people with heart disease, 
particle pollution has been linked to heart attacks and arrhythmias.
•
•
•
Groups sensitive to the effects of air pollution 
beginning at the orange air quality level:
Ground-level Ozone: People with lung disease (such as asthma),     
children, and adults who are active outdoors.
Particle Pollution: People with heart or lung disease (such as asthma), 
older adults, and children.
