/
/
Asthma Action Plan Name:
Date:
Doctor’s Name:
Doctor’s Phone Number:
Main Emergency Contact:
Backup Emergency Contact:
Green Zone: No coughing, wheezing, chest tightness, or shortness of breath.
Can do usual activities.
Doing 
Well
Every day: Take these medicines, even if you’re not having any symptoms. 
Avoid triggers that you know make your asthma worse.
Medicine
How much to take
When to take
Before you exercise: Take
2 or 
4 Puffs of 
5 minutes before you start, as needed.
Yellow Zone: One or more of these symptoms: coughing, wheezing, chest tighness,
breathing trouble, waking up at night due to asthma.
Or, if you can only do some, but not all, usual activities.
Some 
Symptoms
Keep taking your Green Zone medicine and avoiding triggers as usual AND take this medicine:
Medicine
(Quick-relief)
How much to take and how often
Puffs
Can repeat every
minutes, Up to
times
OR
Nebulizer:
Use it once
If you return to the Green Zone after 1 hour, keep monitoring to be sure you stay in the Green Zone.
If you do not return to the Green Zone after 1 hour take this medicine:
Medicine
(Quick-relief)
How much to take and how often
Puffs
OR
Nebulizer:
Use it once
AND: (Oral Steroid)
Take
mg each day for
(3 to 10) days
Call your doctor (or have someone call) just before you take the oral steroid OR
minutes/hours
after taking the oral steroid, based on the instructions your doctor gave when the medicine was 
prescribed.
/
/
Asthma Action Plan Name:
Date:
Doctor’s Name:
Doctor’s Phone Number:
Main Emergency Contact:
Backup Emergency Contact:
Red Zone: EMERGENCY!  Very short of breath, or quick-relief medicines have not
helped, or symptoms are the same or worse after 24 hours in the Yellow Zone. 
Or, if you cannot do any of your usual activities.
Severe 
Symptoms 
Emergency
Take this medicine
(Quick-relief)
How much to take
Puffs
Can repeat every
minutes,
up to
times
OR
Nebulizer:
Can repeat every
minutes, up to
times
(Oral steroid)
Take
mg.
After you take your medicine, call your doctor right away!
If you’re still in the Red Zone after 15 minutes and have not reached your doctor, go 
to the hospital or call 911!
If you have these DANGER SIGNS: trouble walking or talking due to shortness of 
breath or your lips or fingernails are blue, pale, or gray, take
 puffs of your 
quick-relief medicine and GO to the hospital or call 911 NOW!
These DANGER SIGNS mean you need help right away. Don’t wait to hear back from 
your doctor.
GO to the hospital or call 911 NOW!
If you use a peak flow meter you can use these scores to determine your current zone:
Your best score
Your green zone
or higher
(80% of best score)
Your yellow zone
to
(50 to 80% of best score)
Your red zone
or lower
(50% of best score)
Know Your Asthma Triggers.
Learn how to avoid triggers to control your asthma.
Triggers are things that make your asthma symptoms worse. People with asthma do not all 
have the same triggers. Avoiding your triggers is one step you can take to help keep your 
asthma under control. Work with your healthcare provider to check whether any of these things 
make your asthma worse, then take the related steps below. Check CDC’s webpage for other 
steps you can take: www.cdc.gov/asthma
Outdoor Triggers
Weather
Air Quality
Pollen
• Pay attention to radio, television, the internet, or newspaper reports about 
things that might trigger your asthma. These might include reports about 
weather, air quality, pollen count, or wildfire conditions.
• Plan outdoor activities for when the air quality is best.
• If pollen triggers your asthma, close windows and turn on air conditioning 
(if possible) when pollen levels are high.
• When there are wildfires, stay away from areas where there is smoke or 
vapors. Stay indoors, if possible, to avoid smoke or vapors.
• When it is cold, wear a scarf or face mask that covers your nose and mouth 
to keep airflow as warm as possible.
Indoor Triggers
If you are allergic to dust mites, cockroaches, rodents, indoor mold, or pets, use an air purifier with a 
high-energy particulate air (HEPA) filter, and use HEPA filters for vacuum cleaners. Keep your home 
as clean as possible. If you can, ask someone else to clean your home regularly, or wear a dust mask 
while you clean.
Pets
If you are allergic to your pet, the best way to avoid exposure is to remove 
the pet from your home and have the house cleaned. If you can’t remove the 
pet:
• Keep the pet out of your bedroom.
• Ask a family member to wash your pet regularly.
• Use allergen-proof pillow and mattress covers.
• Use an air cleaner with HEPA filter.
Note: Pet fur, skin, and saliva trigger some people’s asthma.
Dust mites
(tiny bugs that live 
in dust and fabric)
• Keep relative humidity levels in your home low, around 30%–50%.
• Wash your bedding every week and dry completely.
• Use allergen-proof pillow and mattress covers.
Know Your Asthma Triggers.
Indoor Triggers
Cockroaches
Mice
Rats
• Keep your kitchen clean and store food and garbage in closed containers.
• Don’t leave out any standing water or other liquids.
• Seal cracks or openings in cabinets, walls, floorboards, and around 
plumbing.
• Use traps or poison bait to get rid of roaches, mice, or rats. Keep bait away 
and out of reach of children and pets. Avoid sprays and foggers.
Mold
Humidity
• Fix water leaks as soon as possible and dry damp or wet items within 48 
hours.
• Remove all moldy items from your home.
• Use an air conditioner or dehumidifier to keep the air dry in your home. 
Keep relative humidity levels in your home low, around 30%–50%.
• Empty and clean refrigerator and air conditioner drip pans regularly.
• Use bathroom exhaust fans or open windows when you shower.
Smoke
Sprays
Scents
Disinfectants
• Avoid places where people smoke. If you smoke, ask your healthcare 
provider how to quit.
• Don’t use a wood-burning stove, kerosene heater, or fireplace.
• Avoid perfume, paint, hairspray, and talcum powder.
• Try to stay away when cleaners or disinfectants are being used and right 
after their use.
• Increase air flow by opening doors and windows and turning on exhaust 
fans.
Other Common Triggers
Illness
• Contact your healthcare provider if you think you have another health 
problem that is making it harder for you to breathe. Such problems might 
include the flu, a cold, acid reflux (heartburn), a sinus infection, severe 
allergies, or another health concern.
Emotions
• Talk to your healthcare provider if anxiety, stress, or other emotions make 
your asthma worse.
Notes:
