Air pollution can make asthma
symptoms worse and trigger attacks.
If you or your child has asthma, have you
ever noticed symptoms get worse when
the air is polluted? Air pollution can make
it harder to breathe. It can also cause other
symptoms, like coughing, wheezing, chest
discomfort, and a burning feeling in the
lungs.
Two key air pollutants can affect asthma.
One is ozone (found in smog). The other is
particle pollution (found in haze, smoke, and
dust). When ozone and particle pollution
are in the air, adults and children with
asthma are more likely to have symptoms.
You can take steps to help protect
your health from air pollution.
 Get to know how sensitive you are to air
pollution.
• Notice your asthma symptoms when you
are physically active. Do they happen
more often when the air is more polluted?
If so, you may be sensitive to air pollution.
• Also notice any asthma symptoms that
begin up to a day after you have been
outdoors in polluted air. Air pollution
can make you more sensitive to asthma
triggers, like mold and dust mites. If
you are more sensitive than usual to
indoor asthma triggers, it could be
due to air pollution outdoors. 
 Know when and where air pollution may
be bad.
• Ozone is often worst on hot summer
days, especially in the afternoons and
early evenings.
• Particle pollution can be bad any
time of year, even in winter. It can be
especially bad when the weather is calm,
allowing air pollution to build up.
Particle levels can also be high:
— Near busy roads, during rush hour,
and around factories. 
— When there is smoke in the air from
wood stoves, fireplaces, or burning
vegetation. 
1
2
ASTHMA AND OUTDOOR AIR POLLUTION
 Plan activities when and where pollution
levels are lower. Regular exercise is
important for staying healthy, especially
for people with asthma. By adjusting when
and where you exercise, you can lead a
healthy lifestyle and help reduce your
asthma symptoms when the air is polluted.
In summer, plan your most vigorous
activities for the morning. Try to exercise
away from busy roads or industrial areas.
On hot, smoggy days when ozone levels
are high, think about exercising indoors.
 Change your activity level. When the air
is polluted, try to take it easier if you are
active outdoors. This will reduce how
much pollution you breathe. Even if you
can’t change your schedule, you might be
able to change your activity so it is less
intense. For example, go for a walk
instead of a jog. Or, spend less time
on the activity. For example, jog for
20 minutes instead of 30.
 Listen to your body. If you get asthma
symptoms when the air is polluted, stop your
activity. Find another, less intense activity.
 Keep your quick-relief medicine on hand
when you’re active outdoors. That way,
if you do have symptoms, you’ll be
prepared. This is especially important
if you’re starting a new activity that is
more intense than you are used to.
 Consult your health care provider. If you
have asthma symptoms when the air is
polluted, talk with your health care
provider.
• If you will be exercising more than
usual, discuss this with your health care
provider. Ask whether you should use
medicine before you start outdoor
activities.
• If you have symptoms during a certain
type of activity, ask your health care
provider if you should follow an asthma
action plan.
Get up-to-date information about 
your local air quality:
Sometimes you can tell that the air is
polluted—for example, on a smoggy or
hazy day. But often you can’t. In many
areas, you can find air quality forecasts 
and reports on local TV or radio. These 
reports use the Air Quality Index, or AQI,
a simple color scale, to tell you how
clean or polluted the air is. You can also
find these reports on the Internet at:
www.epa.gov/airnow. You can use the AQI
to plan your activities each day to help
reduce your asthma symptoms.
For more information:
Air quality and health:
• EPA’s AIRNow website at
www.epa.gov/airnow
• Call 1-800-490-9198 to request free EPA
brochures on: Ozone and Your Health,
Particle Pollution and Your Health, and Air
Quality Index: A Guide to Air Quality and
Your Health.
Asthma:
• Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) Web site at
www.cdc.gov/asthma
Indoor air and asthma:
• EPA’s asthma website at
www.epa.gov/asthma
4
3
EPA-452-F-04-002
