Skip to main content
U.S. flag
An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know
Search
Search EPA.gov

Environmental Topics
Laws & Regulations
Report a Violation
About EPA
Burn Wise
CONTACT US
Best Wood-Burning Practices
Properly installed, correctly used wood-burning appliances should generate very little smoke. If you regularly see or smell smoke, you may have a problem. Reduce smoke inside and outside your home using the steps. 

On this page:
Building a Fire
Safe Practices
What Not to Burn
Building a Fire
Dry Seasoned Wood
Wet Wood is a Waste
Burn only dry, split, well-seasoned wood. Properly seasoned wood is darker, weighs less, and sounds hollow when hit against another piece of wood. Find out more with the Wet Wood is a Waste brochure (PDF) and video.
An efficient, hot fire requires good firewood, using the right wood in the right amount, and good fire building technique. 
Season wood for at least six months. Be sure to store wood outdoors, off the ground, with only the top covered -- covering the sides traps in moisture.
Wood burns best at a moisture content of less than 20 percent. Test wood with a wood moisture meter before you burn it.
Start fires with newspaper, dry kindling, or all natural fire starters, or install a natural gas or propane log lighter in your open fireplace.
See best-practices videos for more on building a fire, building a wood storage shed, seasoning wood, testing wood with a moisture meter and proper stove operation.

Buy and burn locally cut firewood to decrease the risk of transporting invasive forest pests to your property. 

Learn more from the Don’t Move Firewood campaign.

Safe Wood-Burning Practices
Build Firewood Storage
example woodshed
Learn about simple and inexpensive ways to store firewood or build a firewood storage shed through how-to steps and short videos.

When using your wood burning appliance, follow these guidelines for safe operation:

Keep flammable items, like curtains, furniture, newspapers, and books, away from your appliance.
Only use newspaper, dry kindling and all-natural or organic fire starters. Never start a fire with gasoline, kerosene, or charcoal starter.
Do not burn wet or green (unseasoned) wood.
Many wax and sawdust logs are made for open hearth fireplaces only. Check your wood stove or fireplace insert operating instructions before using artificial logs.  
If you use manufactured logs, choose those made from 100 percent compressed sawdust.
Build hot fires. For most appliances, a smoldering fire is not safe or efficient.
Keep the doors of your wood-burning appliance closed unless loading or stoking the live fire. Harmful chemicals, like carbon monoxide, can be released into your home.
Regularly remove ashes into a covered, metal container. Store the container outdoors on a nonflammable surface.
Keep a fire extinguisher handy. 
Check your local air quality forecast before you burn.
What Not to Burn
Upgrade your Wood-burning Appliance
Upgrade your old wood burning device to a cleaner, more efficient appliance (gas, heat pump, EPA-certified stove). Consider efficiency, emissions, and the size of the space you'll be heating. Learn more.

Label indicating a wood burning appliance is EPA certified
These materials can release toxic or harmful chemicals when burned, and may damage your appliance:

Household trash, including cardboard, plastics, foam and the colored ink on magazines, boxes, and wrappers
Coated, painted, and pressure-treated wood
Ocean driftwood, plywood, particle board, or any wood with glue on or in it
Wet, rotted, diseased, or moldy wood
Plastic, asbestos, rubber, manure and animal remains
Burn Wise Home
What You Can Do
Wood Smoke Resources in Your State
Program Participation
Wood Smoke and Your Health
Consumers
Air Agencies
Businesses
Education and Outreach
Contact Us to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.
LAST UPDATED ON APRIL 25, 2023
United States Environmental Protection Agency
Discover.
Accessibility Statement
Budget & Performance
Contracting
EPA www Web Snapshot
Grants
No FEAR Act Data
Plain Writing
Privacy
Privacy and Security Notice
Connect.
Data
Inspector General
Jobs
Newsroom
Regulations.gov
Subscribe
USA.gov
White House
Ask.
Contact EPA
EPA Disclaimers
Hotlines
FOIA Requests
Frequent Questions
Follow.