Skip directly to site contentSkip directly to search
Español | Other Languages
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People
Climate and Health
CDC
Climate and Health Program
Print
Learn more about CDC/ATSDR’s Agency-wide Climate and Health Strategic Framework
CDC's Climate and Health Program
CDC’s Climate and Health Program supports state, tribal, local, and territorial public health agencies as they prepare for the health impacts of a changing climate. CDC is proud of the collaborative work states, cities, territories, and tribes are doing to develop and implement adaptation plans to protect at-risk populations and locations.

Started in 2010, CDC’s Climate-Ready States and Cities Initiative is now helping 13 grant recipients around the nation use the five-step Building Resilience Against Climate Effects (BRACE) framework to identify likely climate impacts in their communities, potential health effects associated with these impacts, and their most at-risk populations and locations. The BRACE framework then helps these jurisdictions develop and implement health adaptation plans and address gaps in critical public health functions and services. Additionally, the program has created a suite of communication products and guidance to help our grant recipients better communicate with local communities and partners about these climate and health impacts.

CDC also funds additional partners through the “Building Capacity of the Public Health System to Improve Population Health through National, Nonprofit Organizations” program. CDC collaborates with the National Indian Health Board to directly fund tribes through the Climate-Ready Tribes Program.

While the Climate and Health Program is very excited about our accomplishments so far, we are building on this work and continue to develop new projects and provide more opportunities for our partners around the nation as they protect their communities from the local health impacts of a changing climate.

Climate and Health: Preparing Communities for the Health Impacts of Climate Change

Audio Description Low Resolution Video
Learn about our Climate and Health Science Webinar Series
Related Links
Adaptation in Action: CRSCI Grantee Success Stories
The Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States
CDC TRAIN CDC's online learning system
Climate Change and Children’s Health (web-based course)

Impact of Climate Change on Human Health
animated powerpoint showing impact of climate change on human health
Climate change, together with other natural and human-made health stressors, influences human health and disease in numerous ways.

Building Resistance Against Climate Effects (BRACE)
BRACE Infographic
CDC’s Building Resistance Against Climate Effects (BRACE) framework is a process that allows health officials to develop strategies and programs to help communities prepare for the health effects of climate change.

CDC's Climate-Ready States & Cities Initiative
US map indicating CRCSI grantees
CDC is using its public health expertise to help state and city health departments prepare for and respond to the health effects that climate change may bring to their communities.

What's New
a collage of CDC images
Climate and Health news, and new products from CDC.

Resources for Public Health Professionals
intro screen from a climate and health video
Guidance and training, data and tools, webinars, videos, etc.

Heat & Health Tracker
The CDC Heat & Health Tracker provides local heat and health information so communities can better prepare for and respond to extreme heat events.
An online tool to help emergency and public health planners prepare for and respond to extreme heat events by providing timely, user-friendly, local-level heat and health data and information.

Last Reviewed: November 29, 2022
Source: National Center for Environmental Health
Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Syndicate
About CDC
Contact Us
800-232-4636
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
LinkedIn
Youtube
Pinterest
Snapchat
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
Accessibility
External Links
Privacy
Policies
No Fear Act
FOIA
Nondiscrimination
OIG
Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
USA.gov