Skip to main content
U.S. flag
An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know
Search
Search EPA.gov

Environmental Topics
Laws & Regulations
Report a Violation
About EPA
Wildfire Smoke and Your Patients' Health
CONTACT US
Challenges in Predicting Smoke Concentrations
Wildfires can blanket the surrounding area with smoke, raising the level of particle pollution to unhealthy concentrations and creating an air quality concern for residents. Because smoke can travel hundreds or thousands of miles, air quality can also be a problem far from the wildfire itself. Air quality can change rapidly. Predicting if the air quality will improve or worsen can be difficult because of the unpredictable behavior of wildfires and factors such as wind, weather, and terrain. For example, a wind that usually clears out a valley could also blow more smoke in or fan the flames, intensifying the fire and worsening smoke. 

Satellite map  of smoke from Camp fire that is blown west to San Francisco Bay area
Figure 3. Strong winds can cause rapid fire spread and move smoke into communities far from a wildfire. Smoke from the 2018 Camp fire caused weeks of poor air quality in the San Francisco Bay area.
The intense heat generated by an active wildfire drives smoke high into the air where it remains until it cools and begins to descend. As smoke moves downward to ground level, it becomes more diluted and often more widespread. Terrain also affects smoke concentrations. For example, as the sun warms mountain slopes, air is heated and rises, bringing smoke and fire with it from lower elevations affected by smoke. After sunlight passes, the terrain cools and the air descends, creating a down-slope airflow that can alter the smoke dispersal pattern. Daily cycles can help predict repeating patterns of smoke exposures in communities.

Because smoke concentrations during a wildfire are constantly changing, it’s important to check frequently for updates to smoke predictions (See Figure 4, example of smoke outlook). Near-real-time air quality data and forecasts are available to the public via AirNow.gov, including continuous particle pollution data from over 1,700 monitors, and temporary monitors that monitor smoke on an hourly basis during a wildfire. AirNow also has a Fire and Smoke Map where the public can access current nationwide wildfire conditions, links to state advisories and smoke blogs, information about smoke and health, and a variety of external web resources pertaining to wildfires. The interactive map is a joint effort of the U.S. Forest Service, EPA, and state and local air quality agencies.

Example of smoke outlook issues in Colorado describing acres burned, percent containment, potential fire behavior, predicted smoke impacts, and one way to reduce smoke exposure.
Figure 4. Example of smoke outlook produced by an Air Resource Advisor assigned to the 416 Fire. Current smoke outlooks are available at https://wildlandfiresmoke.net/outlooks.
PREVIOUS    |    NEXT
Wildfire Smoke Course Home
About the Wildfire Smoke Course
Public Health Impacts
Health Concerns
Health Effects
Who is at Greater Risk?
Air Quality and Smoke
Challenges in Smoke Prediction
Importance of Patient Education
The Air Quality Index
Reducing Exposure
Preparing for Fire Season
Fire or Smoke Event Plan
Resources
Knowledge Check Questions
References
Contact Us to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.
LAST UPDATED ON FEBRUARY 2, 2024
United States Environmental Protection Agency
Discover.
Accessibility Statement
Budget & Performance
Contracting
EPA www Web Snapshot
Grants
No FEAR Act Data
Plain Writing
Privacy
Privacy and Security Notice
Connect.
Data
Inspector General
Jobs
Newsroom
Regulations.gov
Subscribe
USA.gov
White House
Ask.
Contact EPA
EPA Disclaimers
Hotlines
FOIA Requests
Frequent Questions
Follow.