Skip to main content
U.S. flag
An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know
Search
Search EPA.gov

Environmental Topics
Laws & Regulations
Report a Violation
About EPA
Climate Change Impacts
CONTACT US
Climate Equity
Composite image showing three pictures: a forest of conifers, a cornfield with a transmission tower in it, and a medium sized city's downtown area.
The climate change impacts facing many U.S. sectors can influence certain groups disproportionately. Visit our Climate Change Impacts by Sector section to learn about these effects. 
Climate change does not affect all people equally. Some communities experience disproportionate impacts because of existing vulnerabilities, historical patterns of inequity, socioeconomic disparities, and systemic environmental injustices (e.g., redlining). People who already face the greatest burdens are often the ones affected most by climate change.

EPA is committed to supporting communities—particularly those facing disproportionate impacts—develop and implement equitable solutions to climate change impacts. Only through collaboration across all communities and levels of government can the nation make progress in addressing systemic factors that impact climate equity.

Climate equity is the goal of recognizing and addressing the unequal burdens made worse by climate change, while ensuring that all people share the benefits of climate protection efforts. Achieving equity means that all people—regardless of their race, color, gender, age, sexuality, national origin, ability, or income—live in safe, healthy, fair communities.

Climate Equity and Environmental Justice
Climate equity is a part of the overarching aim of environmental justice, which is a cornerstone of EPA’s mission. Environmental justice is the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless of race, color, national origin, or income with respect to the development, implementation, and enforcement of environmental laws, regulations, and policies. Striving for climate equity is putting these same values into practice when tackling climate change impacts, and ensuring that everyone has equal access to resources and safe spaces.

Climate equity can be woven into the broader efforts to address the socioeconomic, sociocultural, and physical impacts of climate change. It is a public health issue in every respect. The following principles can help governments, community leaders, and community members incorporate climate equity considerations in their work:

Engage. Include people with diverse backgrounds and experiences in community efforts to address climate change. Foster honest conversation, meet people where they are already active (such as in schools and community centers), and involve those leaders who are respected by the community. Indigenous and local knowledge can advance understanding of climate change effects and solutions. When possible, amplify the voices of those who are most vulnerable, underserved, or overburdened. 
Share. Connect communities with the information and data that can help them prepare for and adapt to climate impacts. Helping communities access relevant resources enables them to refine their climate resiliency efforts and empowers them to develop targeted, grassroots solutions.
Build. Climate-resilient solutions based on equity and inclusivity reduce vulnerability for everyone. Consider solutions that boost resilience while improving livelihoods, accessibility, and social and economic well-being. Solutions could include improving the efficiency of buildings, investing in low-carbon transportation networks, and adding green spaces in urban areas. Such solutions can also promote other local benefits by mitigating the effects of urban heat islands, reducing air pollution, and strengthening community interaction.
Prepare. Climate equity includes the ways communities prepare for and respond to extreme events. Consider how overburdened and underserved groups have different needs during an emergency. Being ready to address those specific needs is a part of effective disaster response and overall good governance. Solutions could include providing language or accessibility services.
Overlapping Vulnerabilities
Some communities may be part of multiple groups that are particularly vulnerable to climate change. For example, one community could have a higher percentage of pregnant women or children, which could increase their vulnerability to particulate emissions. In another example, communities with a high elderly population, which is also non-English speaking, may be more susceptible to climate impacts because their limited access to resources compounds their health risks. Those risks extend to a broader community if it is disproportionately made up of socially vulnerable populations. This is one reason why communities are not impacted proportionally.

Climate Change Impacts on Vulnerable Populations
Part of understanding climate equity is recognizing specific populations that are particularly vulnerable to climate change impacts. You can learn more about the relationship between exposure, vulnerability, and human health by how they interact within communities. In addition, you can explore the impacts on certain groups in greater detail by visiting the following pages:

Children
Socially Vulnerable People
Indigenous Populations
Older Adults
People with Chronic Medical Conditions
People with Disabilities
Workers
Pregnant Women
Related Resources
Learn more about environmental justice and climate equity:

Environmental Justice at EPA
EJScreen: Environmental Justice Screening and Mapping Tool
Climate Change and Social Vulnerability in the United States: A Focus on Six Impacts
Creating Equitable, Healthy, and Sustainable Communities
National Environmental Justice Advisory Council
Heat Islands and Equity
Environmental Justice Primer for Ports
Climate Change Impacts Home
Impacts by Sector
Human Health
State and Regional Impacts
Climate Equity
Contact Us to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.
LAST UPDATED ON JANUARY 2, 2024
United States Environmental Protection Agency
Discover.
Accessibility Statement
Budget & Performance
Contracting
EPA www Web Snapshot
Grants
No FEAR Act Data
Plain Writing
Privacy
Privacy and Security Notice
Connect.
Data
Inspector General
Jobs
Newsroom
Regulations.gov
Subscribe
USA.gov
White House
Ask.
Contact EPA
EPA Disclaimers
Hotlines
FOIA Requests
Frequent Questions
Follow.