Skip to main content
U.S. flag
An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know
Search
Search EPA.gov

Environmental Topics
Laws & Regulations
Report a Violation
About EPA
Climate Change Impacts
CONTACT US
Climate Change and the Health of Pregnant, Breastfeeding, and Postpartum Women
Mother wearing a yellow shirt holds a newborn with a yellow jumper while resting on a hospital bed.
Exposure to extreme heat has been associated with preterm births. In 2019, 1 of every 10 infants born in the United States was preterm (before 37 weeks of pregnancy were completed).
Pregnant women and their fetuses are more vulnerable than the general population to the health impacts of climate change because:

Climate-related hazards, including extreme heat, flooding, and wildfires, have been linked to certain health problems, such as anemia, eclampsia, low birth weight, preterm birth, and even miscarriage.1
Pregnant women need reliable access to transportation and medical care, which can be disrupted during and after extreme weather events.2, 3
There are many biological and behavioral changes that occur during pregnancy and the postpartum period that can make women more prone to insect-, food-, and water-related illnesses. Some of these illnesses, which may increase due to climate change, can also threaten maternal and fetal health.4, 5, 6
Pregnant and postpartum women can be at increased risk of experiencing post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depression after natural disasters and extreme weather events.7
Photo caption endnote:8, 9

On this page:
Key Threats to the Health of Pregnant, Breastfeeding, and Postpartum Women
What You Can Do
Investigate Other Populations At Risk
Related Resources
Endnotes
EPA Adaptation Resources
EPA works to protect and improve human health and the environment. Helping vulnerable populations adapt to and protect themselves against climate impacts is a part of that. See additional resources on related EPA adaptation efforts:

EPA’s Climate Change Adaptation Plan
Climate Change Adaptation Resource Center
Indoor Air Quality
Chemical Exposure and Health
Water Quality and Health
Key Threats to the Health of Pregnant, Breastfeeding, and Postpartum Women
A number of climate-related hazards threaten the health of pregnant, breastfeeding, and postpartum women in the United States. Below are some examples of the potential health impacts of these hazards.

Water-Related Illnesses
Food System Impacts
Heat Illnesses
Respiratory Illnesses
Insect- and Tick-Related Diseases
Mental Health Effects
Water-Related Illnesses
Climate change will impact water resources in many ways. For example, changes in water and air temperatures, heavier and longer rains, flooding, and rising sea levels can introduce disease-carrying organisms into drinking water supplies and recreational waters.12 Drinking or coming in contact with untreated contaminated water can cause gastrointestinal and other illnesses for any individual;13 however, pregnant women have a higher risk of gastrointestinal illness if they come in contact with contaminated water than other adults.14 Severe gastrointestinal illness can cause pregnancy loss and preterm birth.15

Flooding has been associated with conditions that threaten maternal health, including anemia (low red blood cell counts sometimes caused by low iron intake), preeclampsia (a high blood pressure condition), and eclampsia, which can cause seizures.16

A young woman inspects produce in a grocery store display.
Access to nutritious food is critical to the health of pregnant women.
Food System Impacts
As the climate changes, rising temperatures and extreme weather events—such as floods and droughts—threaten food quality, production, transportation, availability, and safety. Food-related illnesses, such as listeria and toxoplasma, can be life-threatening and increase the risk of miscarriage, stillbirth, or premature delivery.17

Food safety and proper nutrition are critical to both maternal and fetal health. Extreme events, such as wildfires, floods, heat waves, and droughts, may disrupt food production and distribution, increase costs, and limit availability. These impacts could make it harder for mothers to get healthy food.18 Food shortages may lead to poor nutrition, which can make pregnancy more difficult and cause delivery problems, low birth weight, and even infant mortality.19

Heat Illnesses
A pregnant mother sits on a couch drinking a glass of water.
Dehydration can have adverse effects during pregnancy and the health of newborns.
Extreme heat events are expected to last longer and become more frequent and intense as the climate changes.20 Heat illnesses can occur when a person is exposed to high temperatures and their body cannot cool down. Increases in average and extreme temperatures are expected to lead to more heat illnesses and deaths among vulnerable people, including pregnant women.21

Exposure to extreme heat can also lead to dehydration and kidney failure in pregnant women.22 Pregnant women are also more prone to heat exhaustion and heat stroke.23 Extreme heat exposure in pregnant women has been associated with low birth weight, preterm birth, and infant mortality.24, 25

Photo caption endnote:26

Overlapping Vulnerabilities
Pregnant, breastfeeding, and postpartum women may also be members of other groups with specific vulnerabilities to climate change. For instance, pregnant women from communities of color, low-income groups, and certain immigrant groups may face increased risks to certain climate impacts, less access to care, or higher incidence of chronic medical conditions when compared to other groups.10 These groups of people are also more likely to live in areas with higher levels of air pollution, older infrastructure, and increased risk of flooding, all of which may be worsened by climate change.11

Respiratory Illnesses
Climate change may increase outdoor air pollutants, such as dust from droughts, wildfire smoke, and ground-level ozone.27 Pregnant women (like other vulnerable groups) are sensitive to the harmful effects of wildfire smoke.28 They should take extra actions to reduce their exposure to wildfire smoke, which could affect the developing fetus and may raise the risk of low birth weight and premature birth.29

Insect- and Tick-Related Diseases
Rising temperatures and changing seasonal patterns can lengthen the times when mosquitoes and ticks are most active and widen their range. In some regions, that results in a northward expansion of where ticks may live; while in other areas, ticks may be active for longer periods throughout the year.30 Warmer temperatures associated with climate change can also increase mosquito development and biting rates, while increased rainfall can create more breeding sites for mosquitoes.31

These changes may increase the prevalence of mosquitoes that transmit viruses, such as the Zika virus and dengue fever.32 If a woman is infected with Zika during her pregnancy, the infection can be passed to her fetus. Infection can cause certain brain defects, including microcephaly, where a baby’s head is much smaller than expected due to lack of brain development.33


A study conducted after Hurricane Katrina found pregnant women who had severe hurricane experiences were at a significantly greater risk for PTSD and depression.
In addition, pregnant women and fetuses are at more risk of developing complications from other mosquito-transmitted illnesses, like dengue fever, due to immune system changes during pregnancy.34 Most people who contract dengue fever experience mild symptoms such as aches and pains, nausea, and vomiting. They also recover in a few days to a week.35

Mental Health Effects
Trauma from extreme weather events can cause psychological stress, worsen mental illnesses, and add emotional stress for pregnant and postpartum women.36 One study found that compared to men, women were at increased risk for PTSD and other mental health effects after a disaster.37 In addition, extreme weather events can disrupt support networks, behavioral health services, and treatment access—all of which may affect women’s ability to cope.

Photo caption endnote:38

What You Can Do
Women who are pregnant, planning a pregnancy, or who are new mothers can take steps to reduce impacts of climate change on their health. Consider the following action items:

Talk to your health care provider to create a plan for natural disasters and other emergencies. Discuss where to get prenatal care if your doctor’s office closes, where to go for a safe delivery, and how to recognize the signs of labor. Protect medical records and prepare a two-week supply of medications, food, water, and medical supplies.
Take care of your emotional health. Get plenty of rest, talk to your health care provider about depression and other mental illnesses during pregnancy, and know where to seek emergency mental health help in case of a disaster.
Use an EPA-registered insect repellent that is safe for pregnant and breastfeeding women. Know where Zika cases have been reported and avoid travel to areas where there are outbreaks.
Check the air quality in your area and pay attention to wildfire warnings. Follow your health care provider’s advice in the event of a wildfire. Evacuate if you are having trouble breathing.
Protect yourself from indoor air pollution. Consider a portable air cleaner or high-efficiency air filter to help improve your air quality indoors.
Stay cool and hydrated. Drink plenty of fluids, take breaks from work, and stay in air conditioning when it is hot outside. In case of emergencies, locate your nearest cooling center.
Related Resources
Climate and Health Assessment
Fifth National Climate Assessment
EPA resources:
Climate Change
Other resources:
CDC Pregnancy Page
Emergency Preparedness: Hurricanes, Floods and Pregnancy
Endnotes
1 Gamble, J.L., et al. (2016). Ch. 9: Populations of concern. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 255 and p. 257.

2 Ibid, p. 257.

3 Osterman, M.J.K., & J.A. Martin. (2018). Timing and adequacy of prenatal care in the United States, 2016. In: National vital statistics reports, vol. 67, no. 3. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics, p. 2. Retrieved 3/11/2022.

4 Gamble, J.L., et al. (2016). Ch. 9: Populations of concern. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 256.

5 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). (2019). Exposure factors handbook. Retrieved 3/11/2022.

6 EPA. (2015). Issue paper on physiological and behavioral changes in pregnant and lactating women and available exposure factors. Retrieved 3/11/2022.

7 Dodgen, D., et al. (2016). Ch. 8: Mental health and well-being. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 224.

8 Gamble, J.L., et al. (2016). Ch. 9: Populations of concern. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 256.

9 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2019). Preterm birth. Retrieved 11/9/2021 Retrieved 3/11/2022.

10 Gamble, J.L., et al. (2016). Ch. 9: Populations of concern. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 252.

11 Ibid, p. 257.

12 Trtanj, J., et al. (2016). Ch. 6: Water-related illness. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 159.

13 Ibid, p. 165.

14 Ibid, p. 170.

15 Ibid, p. 170.

16 Gamble, J.L., et al. (2016). Ch. 9: Populations of concern. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 257.

17 Ziska, L., et al. (2016). Ch. 7: Food safety, nutrition, and distribution. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 194.

18 Ibid, p. 191.

19 Dodgen, D., et al. (2016). Ch. 8: Mental health and well-being. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 224.

20 Sarofim, M.C., et al. (2016). Ch. 2: Temperature-related death and illness. The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 51.

21 Crimmins, A., et al. (2016). Executive summary. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 6.

22 Ebi, K.L., et al. (2018). Human health. In: Impacts, risks, and adaptation in the United States: Fourth national climate assessment, volume II. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, pp. 544–545.

23 CDC. (2017). Reproductive health and the workplace. Retrieved 3/11/2022.

24 Sarofim, M.C., et al. (2016). Ch. 2: Temperature-related death and illness. The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 54.

25 Ebi, K.L., et al. (2018). Human health. In: Impacts, risks, and adaptation in the United States: Fourth national climate assessment, volume II. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 545.

26 Gamble, J.L., et al. (2016). Ch. 9: Populations of concern. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 257.

27 Fann, N., et al. (2016). Ch. 3: Air quality impacts. The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 80.

28 Bell, J.E., et al. (2016). Ch. 4: Impacts of extreme events on human health. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 111.

29 Ibid, p. 110.

30 Beard, C.B., et al. (2016). Ch. 5: Vector-borne diseases. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 144.

31 Beard, C.B., et al. (2016). Ch. 5: Vector-borne diseases. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, pp. 141–142.

32 Ebi, K.L., et al. (2018). Human health. In: Impacts, risks, and adaptation in the United States: Fourth national climate assessment, volume II. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 545.

33 CDC. (2021). 10 tips for preventing infections before and during pregnancy. Retrieved 3/11/2022.

34 Gamble, J.L., et al. (2016). Ch. 9: Populations of concern. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 256.

35 CDC. (2021). Dengue symptoms and treatment. Retrieved 3/11/2022.

36 Dodgen, D., et al. (2016). Ch. 8: Mental health and well-being. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 224.

37 Ibid, p. 224.

38 Ibid, p. 224.

Climate Change Impacts Home
Impacts by Sector
Human Health
What Can We Do?
Who's Most at Risk?
Children
Socially Vulnerable People
Indigenous Populations
Older Adults
People with Chronic Medical Conditions
People with Disabilities
Workers
Pregnant, Breastfeeding, and Postpartum Women
State and Regional Impacts
Climate Equity
Contact Us to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.
LAST UPDATED ON DECEMBER 27, 2023
United States Environmental Protection Agency
Discover.
Accessibility Statement
Budget & Performance
Contracting
EPA www Web Snapshot
Grants
No FEAR Act Data
Plain Writing
Privacy
Privacy and Security Notice
Connect.
Data
Inspector General
Jobs
Newsroom
Regulations.gov
Subscribe
USA.gov
White House
Ask.
Contact EPA
EPA Disclaimers
Hotlines
FOIA Requests
Frequent Questions
Follow.