CLIMATE CHANGE 101
Climate scientists are supplying a wealth of evidence about what is happening to the earth’s climate and 
what it portends for our local environments, while other disciplines are identifying and developing effective 
interventions. Evidence-based public health practice requires that public health professionals apply evidence 
developed by epidemiologists, clinical researchers, and scientists across a broad range of other disciplines. You 
don’t need to be a climate scientist to address the health risks of climate change or the health benefits of climate 
action. Our job is to draw on the science and apply it in public health practice.
97% of climate scientists agree that climate change is happening now and there is scientific 
consensus that is driven by human activity.1
Climate Change 
101
Climate Change: One symptom of planetary health
While climate change is the greatest health challenge of our time, it is one of many disruptions to 
what is known as planetary health. Planetary health asserts that the scale and nature of human 
activity, including population growth, is pushing the limits of all the planet’s resources to the brink 
of habitability. Human exploitation and consumption of Earth’s resources are causing fundamental 
changes in the planet’s biophysical processes, which include climate change, but also widespread 
pollution of air, water, and soils; rapid biodiversity loss; altering of carbon, nitrogen, and 
phosphorus cycles; pervasive changes in land use and land cover; and scarcity of resources critical to 
sustaining life, such as water and arable land. 
“Each of these interacts with the others in complex ways, altering the quality of the air we 
breathe, the water we have access to, and the food we can produce. Rapidly changing 
environmental conditions also alter our exposures to infectious diseases and natural hazards 
such as heat waves, droughts, floods, fires, and tropical storms. These… ultimately affect every 
dimension of our health and wellbeing, including nutritional outcomes, infectious disease, 
non-¬communicable disease, displacement and conflict, and mental health outcomes…We 
need to expand the realm of public health to include how we manage our planet’s natural 
systems: the types of cities we construct, how we produce energy, how we feed ourselves, and 
how well we protect our marine and terrestrial biodiversity. In the context of planetary health, 
the boundaries between public health and nearly every other facet of human activity become 
more porous. In short, we need a new paradigm.”
Dr. Samuel Myers, November 20174
14
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
3.1 What Is Climate Change?
•	
Weather is the temperature, humidity, precipitation, cloudiness, and wind that we experience in the 
atmosphere at a given time in a specific location. Weather forecasts are generally accurate over days to 
weeks. Climate is the average weather over a long time period (30–50 years) in a region.
•	
Climate variability refers to natural variation in climate that occurs over months to decades. El Niño, 
which changes temperature, rain, and wind patterns in many regions over about 2–7 years, is an example 
of natural climate variability. Climate change is a systematic change in the long-term state of the climate 
over multiple decades or longer.2  
Climate scientists use statistical tests to ascertain that observed changes in climate are not within the range 
of natural variability. The 2017 Fourth National Climate Assessment states that “there are no alternative 
explanations supported by the evidence that are either credible or that can contribute more than marginally to 
the observed patterns.”3 
3.2 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Cause Climate Change5 
Climate change is caused by a change in the earth’s energy balance. The earth is gaining energy
as the atmosphere increasingly stores more of the sun’s energy than it radiates or reflects back
into space. 
Since the Industrial Revolution started over 200 years ago, human activities have added very large quantities of 
greenhouse gases (GHG), also called climate pollutants, into Earth’s atmosphere through the burning of fossil 
fuels (e.g., coal, oil, gas). These GHG act like a greenhouse to trap the sun’s energy and heat, rather than letting 
it reflect back into space.6 Without these GHG the earth’s atmosphere would be too cold for life, but when the 
concentration of GHG is too high, too much heat is trapped, and the earth’s temperature rises outside the range 
of natural variability. 
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is the primary GHG from human activities—accounting for 81.6% of all U.S. GHGE in 
2016—and is responsible for the greatest amount of warming to date.7 The main human activity that emits CO2 is 
the combustion of fossil fuels (coal, natural gas, and oil) for electricity production, transportation and industrial 
processes that together account for more than 80% of the CO2 released into the atmosphere.8 Our planet has not 
experienced CO2 levels as high as now since approximately 3.5 million years ago when Earth was about 2.3°C 
warmer and sea levels 33–65 feet higher (Figure 3.2.1).9 CO2 has a long half-life, so the “climate effects of CO2 
released into the atmosphere will persist for tens, if not hundreds, of thousands of years into the future.”10  
15
CLIMATE CHANGE 101
Figure 3.2.1: Atmospheric CO2 at Mauna Loa Observatory11
Other important GHG such as methane, nitrous oxide, black carbon, and various fluorinated gases are emitted 
in smaller quantities than CO2, but they trap more heat in the atmosphere than CO2 traps.12 The ability to trap 
heat is measured as Global Warming Potential (GWP). As the most common and abundant greenhouse gas, CO2 
has a GWP of 1; all other GHG warming potentials are compared to it. Fluorinated gases, for example, have 
GWPs thousands of times greater than CO2, meaning that pound-for-pound, these gases have a much stronger 
impact on climate change than CO2.13 (See Appendix 4 for a summary table of GHGE in the United States, their 
main sources, and their GWP and half-life in the atmosphere.) GHGE come from a variety of sources, but major 
sources include transportation, agriculture, and energy production (Figure 3.2.2).
Figure 3.2.2: Percentage of U.S. GHGE by Economic Sector, 201614 
408.47 ppm 
(July 28, 2018)
16
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Short-Lived Climate Pollutants
Greenhouse gases with a high global warming potential but a short lifetime in the atmosphere are called “short-
lived climate pollutants” (SLCP), or “super-pollutants”. Key SLCP include methane, black carbon, and some 
fluorinated gases. Because of the combination of a short half-life and high GWP, the climate change impacts of 
the SLCP are “front-loaded”—more of the impacts from SLCP occur sooner, while the full weight of impacts from 
CO2 will be felt later. Methane, for example, comprises 10% of total U.S. GHGE and primarily comes from animal 
agriculture, food decomposition, and the extraction, distribution, and use of natural gas.15  
Reducing emissions of short-lived climate pollutants may “buy time” while we make the transition away from 
carbon-polluting systems. Cutting global levels of SLCP significantly by 2030 will:16  
•	
cut global warming in half, or 0.6°C, by 2050 and by 1.4°C by 2100;
•	
prevent 2.4 million premature deaths globally each year.
The Carbon Budget and the Urgency of Climate Action
For many years, there was a scientific consensus that holding global average temperature increases 
of 2°C (3.6°F) above pre-industrial levels would be “safe,” meaning that although climate impacts 
would be significant, they would be manageable. However, far worse impacts of warming 
are occurring at a current average global temperature increase of 1.1°C (2°F) than had been 
anticipated. There is now great concern that if greenhouse gas emissions continue unabated, 
the Earth’s temperature will rise about 4°C (2.7°F) by the end of the century with potentially 
catastrophic consequences for life on earth. In 2015, nearly 200 nations agreed in the Paris 
Agreement that the risks of catastrophic climate change are significantly reduced if we can keep 
global temperatures from rising more than 1.5°C (2.7°F).
Because GHG persist in the atmosphere for many years, the magnitude of warming and other 
climate impacts is not determined by emissions in any one year or from any one source, but rather 
by the total GHG in the atmosphere produced cumulatively and globally over time.18 Scientists 
can calculate how much warming will result from different cumulative amounts of GHG in the 
atmosphere.
The “carbon budget” is the amount of carbon dioxide that can be emitted and still have a 
reasonable chance of remaining below a particular rise in global temperature. To remain below a 
1.5°C rise, total global emissions cannot exceed 240 billion tons of carbon from now forward. This 
is our current “carbon budget.”19 Despite growing research into technological solutions to capture 
and remove CO2 levels in the atmosphere, there is currently no known safe and effective way to 
remove emitted greenhouse gases from the atmosphere on a global scale. Reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions is thus the only known effective way to prevent using up our carbon budget. The 
longer we wait to reduce carbon pollution, the more drastic the action that will be required to 
remain within our carbon budget.
17
CLIMATE CHANGE 101
Runaway climate change: Climate scientists are concerned that some climate impacts may take on a life of their 
own, through positive feedback loops or surpassing of tipping points. For example, collapse of the West Antarctic 
Ice Sheet could lead to very rapid sea level rise, or melting of permafrost could lead to large releases of methane 
that would further increase warming through a positive feedback loop. Likewise, the whiteness of ice gives it 
high reflectivity, especially compared to the dark ocean water. As Artic ice melts, less heat is reflected by ice, 
more is absorbed by the ocean, leading to further warming and rising of sea levels.17 
3.3 Human Activities Cause Climate Change
While GHGE are the proximate cause of climate change, the production and release of these gases into the 
atmosphere is primarily the result of human activity, embedded in key systems such as energy, transportation, 
agriculture, and our consumption-driven economy. These systems are also key contributors to health outcomes 
and health inequities (See Sections 2—Health Equity and 4—Health Impacts). For example:
•	
Transportation systems determine how people and goods get from place to place, affecting physical 
activity, traffic injuries, air pollution, and GHGE. Fuel prices, pedestrian and bicycle infrastructure, and 
access to public transit influence driving behavior. Transportation systems impact access to jobs and 
services, and the loss of farmland and habitat.20  
	
The transportation sector contributed 28% of all U.S. GHG emissions in 2016.21 
	
Transportation is one of the fastest-growing sources of domestic GHGE and accounts for nearly 
half of the increase in total U.S. emissions since 1990.22 
	
On-road vehicles were responsible for the vast majority (83%) of transportation-related GHGE; 
passenger cars and light-duty trucks contribute 60% of these emissions.23 
•	
Agriculture and food systems determine the cost of and access to different kinds of food and nutrition; 
what crops are grown, and how; water usage, soil health and depletion; deforestation, and biodiversity 
loss. Industrialized animal production generates methane from livestock manure, antibiotic resistance 
from the overuse of antibiotics to increase animal growth, and water contamination from the excessive 
application of nitrogen fertilizers and pesticides. Corn and soy subsidies reduce meat prices and increase 
meat consumption.
	
Agriculture was responsible for 9% of total U.S. GHGE in 2016, 52% of methane emissions, and 
84% of nitrous oxide release.24  
	
When fertilizer use, refrigeration, transportation, and land use changes, such as deforestation and 
soil depletion, are taken into account, our food and agriculture systems account for about one 
third of global GHGE.25  
•	
Energy systems provide for heating, lighting, and cooking, but the incomplete combustion of carbon also 
produces significant air pollution (e.g. from indoor cook stoves in poor countries, and from coal-fired 
power plants around the world). An estimated seven million deaths are associated with air pollution 
every year—one in eight of total global deaths.26 Coal and uranium miners are at very high risk of 
occupational illness and injury, and mining often causes irreparable damage to water sources and natural 
habitats.27,28    
18
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
	
Electricity production contributes 28% of U.S. GHGE.29  
	
Electricity generated from renewables releases about 1/20th the GHGE of coal over the full life 
cycle.30 Switching from fossil fuels to clean, renewable energy is a critical path to the reduction of 
greenhouse gas emissions.
•	
Economic systems distribute, allocate and determine access to wealth and resources, foster or alleviate 
wealth inequities, offer access to livelihoods and employment, and—in concert with social value 
systems—determine how much value we place on consumption of goods and/or non-marketable 
resources such as clean air, clean water, and open space.
3.4 Environmental Impacts of Climate Change
Climate change is causing five critical global environmental changes:31 
•	
Warming temperature of the earth’s surface 
and the oceans: The earth has warmed at a 
rate of 0.13°C per decade since 1957, almost 
twice as fast as its rate of warming during the 
previous century. 
•	
Changes in the global ‘hydrologic’ (water) 
cycle: Over the past century there have been 
distinct geographical changes in total annual 
precipitation, with some areas experiencing 
severe and long-term drought and others 
experiencing increased annual precipitation. 
The frequency and intensity of storms 
increases as the atmosphere warms and is able 
to hold more water vapor.   
•	
Declining glaciers and snowpack: Across the 
globe, nearly all glaciers are decreasing in area, 
volume and mass. One billion people living in 
river watersheds fed by glaciers and snowmelt 
may be impacted by early spring runoff and 
flooding and diminished water flows in late 
summer.
•	
Sea level rise: Warmer water expands, so as 
oceans warm the increased volume of water 
is causing sea level rise. Melting glaciers and 
snowpack also contribute to rising seas. 
•	
Ocean acidification: Oceans absorb about 
25% of emitted CO2 from the atmosphere, 
leading to acidification of seawater.
Economic Toll
of Climate Change
The health, social and economic costs of 
climate change are likely to be enormous. 
One recent study linked temperature rise 
to economic impacts on agriculture, crime, 
coastal storms, energy, and human mortality. 
Nationally, every 1°C (1.8°F) rise in average 
temperatures could cost 1.2% of gross 
domestic product and could raise death rates 
by 5.4 per 100,000. If unabated, climate 
change could cause damages that cost the 
poorest third of U.S. counties up to 20% 
of their income.32 Another study estimated 
the health costs of just six climate-related 
events at $14 billion.33 In 2017 alone, the U.S. 
experienced 16 billion dollar climate-related 
disasters ranging from wildfires to tropical 
cyclones to crop freezes.34 The rising costs of 
climate-related damages to infrastructure 
and economic productivity are likely to have 
ripple effects on funding for health and social 
needs. In contrast, a global assessment that 
monetized the health co-benefits of climate 
mitigation found that the value of avoided 
mortality averaged $50–$380 per ton of 
carbon dioxide, which far exceeds projected 
abatement costs.35 
19
CLIMATE CHANGE 101
These global changes result in what we experience as changes in our local weather and climate. 
•	
Greater variability, with “hotter hots,” “drier dries,” and “wetter wets” 
•	
Higher average temperatures and longer frost-free seasons
•	
Longer wildfire seasons and more intense wildfires
•	
Loss of snowpack and earlier spring runoff
•	
Recurrent coastal flooding with high tides and storm surges
•	
Worsening air quality: Higher temperatures increase production of ozone (a key contributor to smog) and 
pollen, as well as increasing the risk of wildfires
•	
Longer pollen seasons and more pollen production
3.5 Climate Change in the United States
Various regions of the U.S. will experience climate change differently. Figures 3.5.1 and 3.5.2 show climate 
change in the U.S. and its effect on weather-related events and temperatures.36 For a more comprehensive view, 
see the Fourth National Climate Assessment.37 
Figure 3.5.1: Climate Change Across the United States38 
20
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Figure 3.5.2: Observed Changes in Temperature and Precipitation in the United States Due 
to Climate Change (1991–2012 compared to 1901–1960)39 
Every community is experiencing the impacts of climate change, albeit in different ways. These impacts will 
worsen as GHG accumulate in the atmosphere. To protect health, we must act to both reduce GHGE and prepare 
for the impacts of climate change. 
