Skip to main content
U.S. flag
An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know
Search
Search EPA.gov

Environmental Topics
Laws & Regulations
Report a Violation
About EPA
Climate Change Impacts
CONTACT US
Climate Change Impacts on Air Quality
Overview
Clean air is critical to human health. It is also important for the health of vegetation and crops.1 It contributes to people’s enjoyment of scenic areas, like national parks and wilderness areas.

The effects of climate change on air quality will continue to vary by region. In many areas of the United States, climate change is expected to worsen harmful ground-level ozone, increase people’s exposure to allergens like pollen, and contribute to worsening air quality.2 It can also decrease visibility so that it is harder to see into the distance.3 Changes in the amount of outdoor air pollutants can also affect indoor air quality.

Did You Know?


slide 2 of 5
Meadow with pollen on flowers
Increased pollen. Rising temperatures and higher carbon dioxide concentrations related to climate change can lengthen the pollen season and increase the amount of pollen produced by plants.31

 
Hot sun in orange sky
Increased ozone. The 10 warmest years on record have occurred since 2005, with record highs across the globe in 2020.27 Temperatures are expected to continue rising, and hot, sunny days can increase the amount of ozone at ground level.

 
Desert dust storm
Increased Particulate Matter. In 2021, the U.S. Southwest experienced one of the most severe long-term droughts of the past 1,200 years.28 Dust from droughts can increase particulate matter and cause air quality issues.

 
Side of house in floodwater
Increased indoor pollutants. Extreme weather, such as flooding and storm surge, can damage buildings and allow water or moisture inside. Damp indoor conditions can lead to the growth of harmful pollutants, such as mold and bacteria.29

 
Wildfire smoke aerial view
Increased wildfires. In 2020, wildfires burned over 10 million acres of land in the United States, the highest-ever amount on record.30 Wildfire smoke lowers air quality and harms human health.

 
Meadow with pollen on flowers
Increased pollen. Rising temperatures and higher carbon dioxide concentrations related to climate change can lengthen the pollen season and increase the amount of pollen produced by plants.31

 
Hot sun in orange sky
Increased ozone. The 10 warmest years on record have occurred since 2005, with record highs across the globe in 2020.27 Temperatures are expected to continue rising, and hot, sunny days can increase the amount of ozone at ground level.

Climate impacts on air quality will depend on what additional measures are taken to reduce air pollution. Regulatory initiatives, partnership programs, and individual actions can all help reduce air pollutants that harm human health, as well as greenhouse gases that contribute to climate change.

Explore the sections on this page to learn more about climate impacts on air quality:

Top Climate Impacts on Air Quality
Air Quality and the Economy
Environmental Justice and Equity
What We Can Do
Related Resources
The Link Between Air Quality and Climate Change

Climate change can affect air quality, and certain air pollutants can affect climate change. For example, hot sunny days associated with a warming climate can increase ground-level ozone in some areas.4 Ground-level ozone is also a greenhouse gas that contributes to climate change by trapping heat in the atmosphere. Read more about greenhouse gases and the climate effects of certain air pollutants on the Basics of Climate Change page.

Top Climate Impacts on Air Quality
Climate change may affect air quality at both local and regional scales. Three key impacts are described in this section.

1. Outdoor and Indoor Air Pollution
Black mold on white windowsill
Some people have allergic reactions to mold. These can include sneezing, red eyes, and a skin rash.10
More than 100 million people in the United States live in areas with poor air quality.5 In many regions of the United States, climate-driven changes in weather conditions, including temperature and precipitation, are expected to increase ground-level ozone and particulate matter (such as windblown dust from droughts or smoke from wildfires).6 These changes worsen existing air pollution. Exposure to these pollutants can lead to or worsen health problems, such as respiratory and heart diseases.

Climate change can also affect indoor air quality. Increases in outside air pollutants, such as ozone and particulate matter, could lead to higher indoor exposures.7 These pollutants can enter a building in many ways, including through open doors and windows and ventilation systems.

Mold, dust mites, bacteria, and other indoor pollutants may increase as climate change-related precipitation and storms increase. For example, flood damage can create a damp indoor environment, leading to mold growth.8 Indoor air pollutants have been linked to heart disease, respiratory diseases such as asthma, and cancer.9

Air pollution may also damage crops, plants, and forests.11 For example, when plants absorb large amounts of ground-level ozone, they experience reduced photosynthesis, slower growth, and higher sensitivity to diseases.12

2. Wildfire Smoke
Person in mask in front of wildfire
Exposure to wildfire smoke increases the risk of respiratory diseases.
Climate change has already led to more frequent wildfires and a longer wildfire season.13 Wildfire smoke pollutes the air, impairing visibility and disrupting outdoor activities. It can also spread hundreds of miles downwind to other regions.

Exposure to wildfire smoke can worsen respiratory illnesses, such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and bronchitis. Wildfire smoke exposures have also been linked to premature births.14

3. Airborne Allergens
A changing climate is expected to cause earlier and longer springs and summers, warmer temperatures, precipitation changes, and higher carbon dioxide concentrations. All of these changes can increase people’s exposure to pollen and other airborne allergens, which in turn can lead to more allergy-related illnesses, such as asthma and hay fever.15

For more specific examples of climate change impacts in your region, please see the National Climate Assessment.

Air Quality and the Economy

Certain population groups are more likely to live near power plants that emit air pollutants. Source: EPA, Power Plants and Neighboring Communities, 2021.25
Cleaner air is closely linked to a healthy economy. For example, good air quality improves Americans’ health and productivity. In 2020 alone, reductions in air pollution prevented more than 230,000 premature deaths, 200,000 heart attacks, 120,000 emergency room visits, and 17 million lost workdays.16 Working toward cleaner air also creates jobs, advances technologies, and produces billions of dollars for the United States in revenues and exported goods and services. 

Environmental Justice and Equity
Many socially vulnerable groups live in industrial or urban areas with high levels of air pollution.17,18 In fact, Black and African Americans individuals are 34% more likely than non-Blacks to live in areas with the highest projected increases in childhood asthma due to climate-related changes in particulate matter.19 Some people are also more vulnerable to the health impacts of air pollution because they have chronic medical conditions. For example, certain communities of color, low-income groups, Indigenous populations, and immigrant groups have higher rates of heart disease, asthma, and COPD.20,21

Certain populations may also be more vulnerable to air quality impacts because they work outside. For example, farm workers, firefighters, roofers, and construction workers are among those workers whom scientists expect will be affected by air quality impacts from climate change.22 

Both rural and urban low-income populations may live in older buildings that are not well sealed, increasing their exposure to outdoor allergens and pollutants.23 Older buildings or buildings in poor condition may also take more damage during extreme weather, such as storms and floods. This can lead to damp indoor environments prone to mold, bacteria, and other indoor air contaminants.24

What We Can Do
Solar panel and wind turbine farm
In 2020, about one-fifth of the United States’ annual energy generation came from renewable energy (green power) sources.26
We can reduce climate and air quality impacts in many ways, including the following:

Go green. Switch to green power from renewable energy sources like solar, wind, and hydropower to reduce both air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions. 
Reduce air pollution from vehicles. Walking, biking, and taking public transit among other actions can reduce emissions from transportation. These choices can also provide other benefits, such as safer streets.
Improve air quality at ports. Communities situated near ports—which often include low-income and minority populations—are at a higher risk of air pollution exposure. Communities and stakeholders can work with EPA’s Ports Initiative to improve environmental performance and advance clean technologies at ports. This effort helps people living near ports breathe cleaner air. Check out the Community-Port Collaboration Toolkit for ways communities can get involved.
Develop urban forests. Planting trees, especially in urban areas and along roads or highways, can help improve air quality. Trees also provide other benefits, such as reducing the impact of urban heat islands.
Prevent wildfires. Pay attention to weather and drought conditions. Avoid activities involving fire or sparks when it’s dry, hot, and windy to help prevent wildfires. 
Reduce your exposure. Use the Air Quality Index (AQI) to guide outdoor activities. When you see that the AQI is unhealthy, take simple steps to reduce your exposure like choosing less intense activities, take more breaks, and reschedule activities to a time when outdoor air quality is better.
Improve indoor air quality. Reduce or remove sources of indoor air pollutants whenever possible. For example, consider using portable air purifiers or high-efficiency filters in your heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems.
Related Resources
Related Climate Indicators
Learn more about some of the key indicators of climate change related to this sector from EPA’s Climate Change Indicators in the United States:

U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Atmospheric Concentrations of Greenhouse Gases
Drought
Ragweed Pollen Season
Wildfires
Fifth National Climate Assessment, Chapter 14: “Air Quality.”
Air Topics. Describes how air quality can affect your health and how EPA is working to protect air quality. 
AirNow Air Quality Index. Provides daily information on how clean or polluted your outdoor air is, along with associated health impacts.
Air Quality Resources for Tribes. Gathers tribal-related resources from across the federal landscape into a single resource. Includes regulatory, policy, planning, guidance, and other materials for tribes to use.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Air Quality. Provides information and resources on protecting yourself from air pollutants.
Environmental Justice Grants and Resources. Manages programs that support communities as they develop solutions to address environmental and health issues, including air quality.
Drought.gov. Shows current drought conditions in the United States and locations of active wildfires. Developed through a multi-agency partnership.
Smoke Sense. Crowdsources air quality observations of smoke via the Smoke Sense mobile app. Citizen scientists can report conditions in their area to improve understanding and communication strategies of wildfire impacts. 
EPA’s Heart Healthy Toolkit. Provides information on the link between air quality and heart disease, as well as steps individuals can take to protect their health.
Endnotes
1 Nolte, C.G., et al. (2018). Ch. 13: Air quality. In: Impacts, risks, and adaptation in the United States: Fourth national climate assessment, volume II. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, pp. 513–516.

2 Nolte, C.G., et al. (2018). Ch. 13: Air quality. In: Impacts, risks, and adaptation in the United States: Fourth national climate assessment, volume II. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, pp. 516–517.

3 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). (2021). Basic information about visibility. Retrieved 3/18/2022. 

4 Nolte, C.G., et al. (2018). Ch. 13: Air quality. In: Impacts, risks, and adaptation in the United States: Fourth national climate assessment, volume II. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 518.

5 Nolte, C.G., et al. (2018). Ch. 13: Air quality. In: Impacts, risks, and adaptation in the United States: Fourth national climate assessment, volume II. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 513.

6 Nolte, C.G., et al. (2018). Ch. 13: Air quality. In: Impacts, risks, and adaptation in the United States: Fourth national climate assessment, volume II. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 516.

7 Nolte, C.G., et al. (2018). Ch. 13: Air quality. In: Impacts, risks, and adaptation in the United States: Fourth national climate assessment, volume II. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 516.

8 EPA. (2021). Indoor air quality. Retrieved 3/18/2022. 

9 EPA. (2021). Indoor air quality. Retrieved 3/18/2022.

10 EPA. (2021). Mold and health. Retrieved 3/18/2022.

11 Nolte, C.G., et al. (2018). Ch. 13: Air quality. In: Impacts, risks, and adaptation in the United States: Fourth national climate assessment, volume II. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 513.

12 EPA. (2022). Ecosystem effects of ozone pollution. Retrieved 3/18/2022. 

13 Nolte, C.G., et al. (2018). Ch. 13: Air quality. In: Impacts, risks, and adaptation in the United States: Fourth national climate assessment, volume II. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 521.

14 Nolte, C.G., et al. (2018). Ch. 13: Air quality. In: Impacts, risks, and adaptation in the United States: Fourth national climate assessment, volume II. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, pp. 518–519.

15 Nolte, C.G., et al. (2018). Ch. 13: Air quality. In: Impacts, risks, and adaptation in the United States: Fourth national climate assessment, volume II. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 522.

16 EPA. (2022). The Clean Air Act and the economy. Retrieved 3/18/2022. 

17 Gamble, J.L., et al. (2016). Ch. 9: Populations of concern. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 253.

18 EPA. (2022). Research on health effects from air pollution. Retrieved 3/18/2022. 

19 EPA. (2021). Climate change and social vulnerability in the United States: A focus on six impacts. EPA 430-R-21-003, pp. 24—25.

20 Gamble, J.L., et al. (2016). Ch. 9: Populations of concern. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 252. 

21 EPA. (2021). Power plants and neighboring communities. Retrieved 3/18/2022. 

22 Gamble, J.L., et al. (2016). Ch. 9: Populations of concern. In: The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 258.

23 Fann, N., et al. (2016). Ch. 3: Air quality impacts. The impacts of climate change on human health in the United States: A scientific assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, pp. 82–83. 

24 EPA. (2021). Indoor air quality (IAQ). Retrieved 3/18/2022. 

25 EPA. (2021.) Climate change and social vulnerability in the United States: A focus on six impacts. EPA 430-R-21-003, p. 21. Retrieved 3/18/2022. 

26 U.S. Energy Information Administration. Renewables became the second-most prevalent U.S. electricity source in 2020. Retrieved 3/18/2022. 

27 Lindsey, R., & L. Dahlman. (2021). Climate change: Global temperature. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved 3/18/2022.

28 Mankin, J.S., et al. (2021). NOAA Drought Task Force report on the 2020–2021 southwestern U.S. drought. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Drought Task Force; NOAA Modeling, Analysis, Predictions and Projections Programs; and National Integrated Drought Information System. Retrieved 5/11/2022.

29 EPA. (2021). Indoor air quality (IAQ). Retrieved 3/18/2022. 

30 National Centers for Environmental Information. (2020). Annual 2020 wildfires report. Retrieved 3/18/2022. 

31 Nolte, C.G., et al. (2018). Ch. 13: Air quality. In: Impacts, risks, and adaptation in the United States: Fourth national climate assessment, volume II. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, p. 514.

Climate Change Impacts Home
Impacts by Sector
Agriculture and Food Supply
Air Quality
Built Environment
Coasts
Ecosystems
Energy
Freshwater Resources
Forests
Health
Ocean and Marine Resources
Transportation
Human Health
State and Regional Impacts
Climate Equity
Contact Us to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.
LAST UPDATED ON MARCH 26, 2024
United States Environmental Protection Agency
Discover.
Accessibility Statement
Budget & Performance
Contracting
EPA www Web Snapshot
Grants
No FEAR Act Data
Plain Writing
Privacy
Privacy and Security Notice
Connect.
Data
Inspector General
Jobs
Newsroom
Regulations.gov
Subscribe
USA.gov
White House
Ask.
Contact EPA
EPA Disclaimers
Hotlines
FOIA Requests
Frequent Questions
Follow.