Skip to main content
U.S. flag
An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know
Search
Search EPA.gov

Environmental Topics
Laws & Regulations
Report a Violation
About EPA
Particle Pollution and Your Patients' Health
CONTACT US
Clinical Scenario 2 for Particle Pollution
Back to Clinical Scenarios

Mrs. Smith, a 68-year-old woman, lives in a small valley along the coast that is susceptible to the rapid accumulation of air pollutants during temperature inversions. She has a history of a dilated cardiomyopathy and the etiology is unknown. Comprehensive cardiovascular evaluation disclosed no evidence of coronary artery disease or familial history of cardiomyopathy. She has never been a smoker and has no documented parenchymal lung disease, hypertension, diabetes, or drug use. Her history has been characterized by intermittent exacerbations of heart failure with one hospitalization three months ago. Her clinical status is usually defined as New York Heart Association Class II and Stage C. Her medications include a long-acting beta-adrenergic receptor blocker, an ACE inhibitor, spironolactone, and a loop diuretic. She walks outdoors daily as tolerated, weighs herself daily, and adheres to her medication schedule and a low-salt diet.

Over several days, she noted that the air was hazy in association with a temperature inversion. Over the last few days, the air quality for her geographical area has reported an orange level—unhealthy for sensitive groups. She has taken precautions to limit her exposure to the smog by reducing her time outdoors and discontinuing her outdoor exercise. Yet she has noted the progressive onset of shortness of breath, a 3-pound weight gain over the last two days, an increase in orthopnea, and leg swelling. She denies paroxysmal dyspnea, palpitations and dizziness, or syncope.

On exam she appears to be volume overloaded with increased central pressures, bibasilar rales, and significant pre-tibial edema. An S3 gallop is present. While her immediate concern is a remedy for her worsening symptoms of heart failure, she asks you whether there is a relationship between the quality of the air and the onset of her symptoms.

Discussion
A recent systematic review and meta-analysis (Shah et al., 2013) shows a relationship between increasing levels of air pollution and hospitalization for heart failure or heart failure mortality. As discussed in other areas of this course, certain clinical conditions such as heart failure and hypertension appear to impart greater vulnerability to some sensitive individuals.  

Heart failure is one of the most relevant and complex health problems facing the U.S. population. According to the National Institute of Health’s National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, heart failure is so prevalent in the U.S. population that it should be considered “a new epidemic.” More than 5.8 million Americans are estimated to have heart failure, and about 550,000 new cases of heart failure are diagnosed annually (Roger, 2013). The prevalence of heart failure is expected to grow given the rate at which the U.S. population is aging, the growing prevalence of obesity and diabetes, and the increased percentage of people surviving heart attacks. Education and guidance of this at-risk population appears prudent.

Balanced response
Increasing levels of particle pollution are associated with increasing symptoms of heart failure and hospitalizations for heart failure exacerbation. One cannot link with certainty Ms. Smith's recent exacerbation of heart failure to the environmental stress of the temperature inversion and high concentration of particle pollution. However, there is sufficient evidence to limit exposure to particle pollution in individuals known to be at high risk from the health effects of the pollutant. As a patient with heart failure, Ms. Smith is such an individual. If practical she should limit outdoor exposure by remaining indoors with air conditioning until the air quality improves.  A HEPA air filter can be effective to lower particle pollution concentrations in the home. Do not recommend an air filtering system that generates ozone (see EPA's guide to air cleaners in the home for more information). While there is limited data showing that filtering the air can modify symptoms associated with air pollution exposure, it is a reasonable recommendation because filtering has been shown to decrease biological and physiological responses to air pollution.   

Back to Clinical Scenarios

Particulate Pollution Course Home
Learn About the Course
What is Particle Pollution?
Particle Pollution Exposure
Cardiovascular Effects
Respiratory Effects
Patient Exposure & the Air Quality Index
Patient Exposure & High Particle Pollution Events
Clinical Scenarios
Frequent Questions
Course Outline & Key Points
Review Questions
Patient Education Tools
Course Evaluation
References
Glossary
Contact Us to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.
LAST UPDATED ON AUGUST 23, 2023
United States Environmental Protection Agency
Discover.
Accessibility Statement
Budget & Performance
Contracting
EPA www Web Snapshot
Grants
No FEAR Act Data
Plain Writing
Privacy
Privacy and Security Notice
Connect.
Data
Inspector General
Jobs
Newsroom
Regulations.gov
Subscribe
USA.gov
White House
Ask.
Contact EPA
EPA Disclaimers
Hotlines
FOIA Requests
Frequent Questions
Follow.