Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an  
Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
A Summary for Health Departments
BRACE Technical Report Series 
Gregory Joseph,1,2 Paul J. Schramm,1 Ambarish Vaidyanathan,1  
Patrick Breysse,3 Bradley Goodwin4
1Climate and Health Program, Asthma and Community Health Branch, Division of Environmental Health 
Science and Practice, National Center for Environmental Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
2Karna, LLC
3Office of the Director, National Center for Environmental Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
4Division of Community Health Investigations, Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention
July 2020
The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the author(s)  
and do not necessarily represent the official position of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  
CS320255-A
Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
ii
A Summary for Health Departments
iii
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge  
the contributors and reviewers of this document.
Maria Mirabelli
Asthma and Community Health Branch
U.S. Centers for Disease Control  
and Prevention
Josephine Malilay
Asthma and Community Health Branch
U.S. Centers for Disease Control  
and Prevention
Alison Clune
Office of Air and Radiation
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Lars Perlmutt
Office of Air and Radiation
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Serena Chung
Office of Research and Development
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Amara Holder
Office of Research and Development
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Stacey Katz
Office of Research and Development
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Gail Robarge
Office of Research and Development
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Jason Sacks
Office of Research and Development
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Jeffery Williams
California Air Resources Board
California Environmental  
Protection Agency
Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
iv
A Summary for Health Departments
v
Contents
Executive Summary  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
Background   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .2
Wildfires . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Climate Change Impact on Wildfires  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Wildfires Smoke Impacts on Human Health  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
At-Risk Populations Affected by Wildfire Smoke  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Pregnant Women . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Children 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Older Adults  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Pre-existing Medical Conditions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Low Socioeconomic Status  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Air Filtration: An Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .6
HVAC Systems and Portable Air Cleaners. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Efficiency and Effectiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Standard Measures of Performance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
MERV: The Measure for HVAC Fibrous Filters  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
CADR: Portable Air Cleaner Measure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Air Cleaning Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Mechanical Filtration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Gas-phase Filtration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Electronic Filtration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Effectiveness in Reducing Pollutant Concentrations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Summary of Evidence  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20
Complementary Methods to Improve Air Filtration   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .21
Selected Resources 
 .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .22
Appendix 
 .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .23
References   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .24
Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
vi
  
A Summary for Health Departments
1
Executive Summary
Over the last few decades, the United States has experienced an increase in frequency 
of intense wildfires. Climate change has likely impacted these events through increased 
summer and spring temperatures, drier vegetation, decreased precipitation in some 
areas, and an increased probability of lightning storms.8,14,19 Wildfires have caused 
billions of dollars in property damage and contributed to an estimated 339,000 
premature deaths per year globally.7,30 Wildfires are also associated with negative health 
outcomes. The smoke from wildfires contains gaseous pollutants and particulate matter 
which are associated with multiple respiratory and cardiovascular illnesses.24 There is 
evidence that certain populations are more vulnerable to the wildfire smoke exposure 
than others, including older adults and infants, pregnant women, people with pre-
existing medical conditions, and people of lower socio-economic status.23 Interventions 
that effectively decrease wildfire smoke exposures can protect these vulnerable 
populations as well as the health of the general public.
This technical document summarizes the available peer-reviewed literature about 
the effectiveness of air filtration as an intervention to decrease exposure to wildfire 
smoke and protect health when sheltering indoors. It describes the different types of air 
filtering technology and metrics for measuring air quality and summarizes the literature 
on their effectiveness in protecting against the harmful air pollutants in wildfire smoke. 
Relevant federal and state resources for local health professionals are listed.
This review illustrates that proper air filtration is an effective method of reducing 
certain wildfire smoke pollutants indoors and potentially limiting the risk of negative 
health impacts associated with exposure to wildfire smoke.
Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
2
Background
Wildfires  
Photo of a wildfire.  
Over the past three decades, the frequency of 
wildfires in the United States has increased. In 
addition, the duration of wildfires and average 
amount of area burned have increased since 1987.1,2 
“Megafires,” which are defined as wildfires that burn 
over 100,000 hectares (ha), have also significantly 
increased in frequency, intensity, and duration 
over the last few decades.3,4 For instance, in 2018 
California experienced one of its largest wildfires on 
record (Mendocino Complex Fire—459,123 ha) and 
its deadliest wildfire (Camp Fire—85 fatalities, 18,804 
destroyed structures) in state history.5,6 The United 
States Forest Service’s annual suppression cost 
has exceeded a billion dollars for 13 of the 18 years 
between 2000 and 2017;7 In contrast, annual suppression costs had never exceeded a 
billion dollars from the years 1985 through 1999.2 These financial costs of wildfires are 
damaging, but the personal cost is far greater. People in wildfire proximity have the 
potential to lose their entire livelihood. Houses, cars, businesses and more are at risk 
of destruction from these events, displacing thousands of people. Displaced people 
put additional strain on community resources as some decide to leave their homes, 
impacting neighboring communities.2 One of the biggest factors that influences the 
increase in severity and frequency of wildfires is climate change.8  
Climate Change Impact on Wildfires 
Human behavior has a direct impact on climate change and the recent trends in 
wildfires.9,10,11,12 As the earth’s climate changes, the effects on the environment and 
weather patterns create an environment in some regions suitable to create large, 
sustained wildfires.9,11,12 The Fourth National Climate Assessment demonstrates that 
global average temperature measured both on land and in oceans has increased by 
about 1.8°F from 1901 to 2016. Sixteen of the last 17 years have been the warmest ever 
recorded by human observation. In the United States, the annual average temperature 
has increased by 1.2°F for the period 1986–2016 and by 1.8°F relative to the beginning 
of last century. Researchers project that additional increases in annual average 
temperatures of about 2.5°F will take place over the next few decades, regardless of any 
changes in human activity to mitigate the changes in climate. The frequency of cold 
waves has dramatically decreased, while the frequency of heat waves has increased 
since the mid-1960s.8 The increased heat caused by global warming creates drier 
climates and even prolonged drought, which could make many environments more 
susceptible to wildfires due to the flammability of fuel sources. Researchers predict 
that climate change will increase the probability for megadroughts within the United 
States.14 The increased temperatures also influence weather patterns. According to the 
United States Forest Service, 46% of the National Forests and Grassland wildfires were 
caused by lightning over the last decade.15 Lightning storms occur more frequently 
A Summary for Health Departments
3
during higher temperatures than when it is cooler.16 Of all the lightning-caused fires 
that occurred from 1994–2012, 78% of them occurred during the summer months.17 
Between 1992 and 2015, 70% of the area burned in the western U.S. region was from 
lightning-ignited wildfires and 27% of the area burned in the Southeastern U.S. resulted 
from lightning-ignited wildfires.18 As the average temperature of the globe continues to 
increase, the frequency of lightning storms will potentially increase as well, which could 
increase the probability of lightning strikes.19  Lightning is the primary natural wildland 
fire source, with an average of over 10,000 lightning-caused  fires reported each year.20 
Wildfires Smoke Impacts on Human Health 
Wildfire smoke is a major contributor to air 
pollution. In 2014, wildfire smoke accounted 
for approximately 30% of all fine particulate 
emissions in the United States.21 The composition 
of wildfire smoke is largely influenced by the type 
of vegetation being burned, flame temperature, 
weather conditions, and moisture content.22 
The key primary emission of public health 
concern from wildfires is particulate matter 
(PM). Particulate matter varies in size, but 90% 
of particulate mass produced by wildfires is fine 
particulate matter, or PM2.5 (particulate matter 
2.5µm in aerodynamic diameter or smaller).23 
PM2.5 has significant health impacts if inhaled.23 
Wildfires also produce harmful gases such as carbon monoxide (CO), nitrous acid 
(HNO2), volatile organic compounds (VOCs), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
(PAHs), nitrous oxide (N2O), nitrogen oxides (NOx), heavy metals, and other air 
pollutants.23,24,25 These are just a few of the dangerous pollutants produced, but wildfire 
smoke can be composed of thousands of different compounds.23 The smoke from 
wildfires poses a significant danger to large areas of the country because it can travel 
long distances under certain weather conditions.1,27 Because of this, there is potential for 
smoke exposure even in areas not in direct danger of wildfire.1,28,29 
There is evidence that suggests exposure to fine particulate matter from wildfire smoke 
can be associated with premature mortality. Many studies have noted the positive 
relationship between fine particulate matter exposure and mortality rates across the 
globe.30,31,32,33 Wildfire smoke has been estimated to attribute to 339,000 deaths per year 
globally, making wildfires an important contributor to global mortality.30 In addition 
to contributing to mortality rates worldwide, wildfire smoke exposure has also been 
associated with cardiovascular and respiratory morbidity.1,8,34 The 2019 EPA Integrated 
Science Assessment on particulate matter highlights the current science on acute 
health effects from particulate matter exposure (see Selected Resources).21
Epidemiologic studies conducted over the last 50 years have demonstrated a 
relationship between an increase in respiratory effects and exposure to wildfire smoke 
pollutants, especially fine particulate matter (PM ).4,24,35,36,37,38
2.5
 PM2.5 can potentially 
contribute to oxidative stress, inflammation, and cell toxicity.39 Increased exposure 
to particulate matter has also been associated with a significant decrease in lung  
Photo of wildfire smoke.
Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
4
functionality.40,41 During wildfire events, there is evidence of increases in hospital visits 
pertaining to respiratory illnesses including asthma, bronchitis, and chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD).26,29,42,43
Positive associations between wildfire smoke exposure and cardiovascular illness have 
been reported in multiple studies.19,42,44 The particulate matter from wildfire smoke has 
been associated with elevated blood pressure and heart rate along with decreased heart 
rate variability.45,46 Recent studies have shown that during wildfire events, emergency 
department visits for cardiovascular illnesses increase. The risk for out-of-hospital 
cardiac arrests also increases during wildfire events.14 Extended exposure to the highly 
polluted air caused by wildfires can significantly increase the risk of cardiovascular 
disease-related mortality and nonfatal events.45
At-Risk Populations Affected by Wildfire Smoke 
Exposure to wildfire smoke poses a significant 
danger to everyone. However, certain populations 
may have a higher risk of experiencing negative 
effects. This section gives a brief overview of 
evidence of vulnerability.
Pregnant Women
Pregnant women may be particularly vulnerable to  
the health impacts of wildfire smoke exposure.24,35,47  
A study that analyzed the effects of long-range 
wildfire smoke transport on pregnant women 
found that exposure to wildfire smoke particulate 
matter over the full gestation and during the second 
trimester were positively associated with preterm birthrate. The researchers found that 
each increase of 1 µg/m3 in the trimester-average wildfire smoke PM2.5 over the second 
trimester was associated with 13.2% increase in odds of preterm birth.35 These results 
were consistent with the findings of another study conducted in Brazil, which found 
that the exposure to air pollutants in biomass burning during the second and third 
trimesters of pregnancy were associated with low birth weight.33 A systematic review 
of evidence highlighted that maternal inhalation of certain hydrocarbons found within 
PM2.5 can lead to endocrine disruption, which could result in intrauterine fetal growth 
retardation.47 Exposure to CO from biomass burning may result in the formation of 
carboxyhemoglobin in the mother, which could potentially result in decreased delivery 
of oxygen to the fetus. 
Children
Children are vulnerable to many environmental hazards due to the ongoing 
development of their respiratory and immune systems.48 Exposure to pollutants in 
wildfire smoke can exacerbate respiratory symptoms in children. A study analyzing the 
effect of the 2003 southern California wildfires on children concluded that in homes 
that had a “smell of fire smoke indoors” for more than six days, the rates of dry coughs 
and sneezing increased threefold. The rates of wheezing increased more than threefold 
and the rates of sore throats, physician visits and missed school increased twofold.49  
Photo of a child using an inhahler. 
A Summary for Health Departments
5
Another study was conducted focusing on the San Diego fires in 2007, where the 
researchers found that among children (aged 0–4 years) emergency department visits 
for respiratory related illnesses increased by 70% during the wildfire PM2.5 exposure 
period.50 These findings were consistent with a study in Chile that found a 40% increase 
in coughing symptoms among children after exposure to wildfire smoke pollutants.13
Older Adults 
Older adults are especially vulnerable to PM2.5.51 A study of the health impacts of 
wildfire smoke pollutant exposure on elderly populations found that hospitalization 
rates for asthma, bronchitis, and wheezing were positively associated with PM2.5 
exposure during periods of wildfire smoke and concluded that the pollutants in wildfire 
smoke can trigger acute respiratory responses.34 These results were consistent with 
another study of cardiovascular and respiratory hospital admissions and exposure 
to fine particulate matter (PM2.5) pollution from the California wildfires of 2003. The 
researchers found a 10.1% increase in hospitalizations for asthma amongst the elderly 
population per 10 µg/m3 increase of PM2.5 concentrations.36 The vulnerability of older 
populations to wildfire smoke pollutants may be linked to their immunology. Older 
people tend to have degraded immune systems, making them more vulnerable to the 
health impacts of wildfire air pollutants.52
Pre-existing Medical Conditions 
People with certain illnesses prior to wildfire events have a higher risk of being 
impacted by the pollutants present in the smoke. Multiple studies have found that 
people with pre-existing respiratory and cardiovascular conditions have a higher risk 
of experiencing exacerbated health symptoms during wildfire events.13,41,53 Studies 
have found that individuals with certain respiratory conditions such as having small 
airways26 and asthma54 exhibited worse symptoms and higher frequency of hospital 
visits during wildfires. A study conducted on individuals with asthma during the 2007 
San Diego wildfires found that exposure to wildfire air pollution was associated with 
increased airway inflammation.55 
Low Socioeconomic Status 
Communities of low socioeconomic status (SES) may be particularly vulnerable to 
the health impacts of wildfire smoke pollutant exposure. People with low SES tend 
to have a higher prevalence of comorbid cardiovascular and respiratory illnesses 
that would make them more susceptible to the effects of the smoke pollutants.56 SES 
also influences individuals’ ability to access resources and adapt to disasters. Low 
SES households are more likely to have poorer housing quality.57 The quality of the 
buildings can play a large factor in the amount of exposure to harmful components of 
wildfire smoke in indoor air. For instance, a study in Arizona suggested that households 
with low SES tend to have more difficulty preparing for wildfire disasters and recovering 
from them than high SES households.58 People of the lowest SES may not even have 
structures to protect them from smoke pollutants. People experiencing homelessness 
are already more susceptible to respiratory and cardiovascular illnesses due to poor 
nutrition, environmental stressors, and crowding.59 Lack of suitable clean air structures 
could make them more vulnerable to high exposure to pollutants, raising their risk of 
exacerbated symptoms and preexisting health conditions.
Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
6
Air Filtration: An Intervention for Wildfire 
Smoke Pollutant Exposure
During wildfires, it is generally advised that people stay inside in order to protect 
themselves from the heavy air pollution caused by the fires.23 Air pollution from wildfire 
smoke still poses a significant danger to individuals that are indoors, as pollutants can 
infiltrate structures through multiple points of entry. One of the most effective ways 
to protect individuals from indoor wildfire smoke pollutant exposure and the health 
impacts associated with it is to ensure that proper air filtration mechanisms are in place 
during wildfire events.60 A wide variety of air filtration technologies are available to 
protect individuals from fine particulate matter and harmful gases indoors. This section 
will define key terms and summarize the main facts about the filtration technologies 
(mechanical, electronic, gas), air devices (installed inside Heating, Ventilation, and 
Air-Conditioning [HVAC] systems and Portable Air Cleaners), and standard measures 
of performance (Minimum Efficiency Reporting Value [MERV] and Clean Air Delivery 
Rate [CADR]). It will also provide a summary of evidence on the effectiveness of these 
technologies in reducing wildfire smoke pollutants and evidence-based complementary 
actions to aid in reducing pollutants within structures.
HVAC Systems and Portable Air Cleaners
Air filtration technology can be implemented in two ways: portable room air cleaners 
and inside central Heating, Ventilation, and Conditioning (HVAC) systems. Both can 
be effective in reducing indoor air pollution when the devices are outfitted with the 
appropriate air filtration technology. There are significant differences when it comes  
to functionality, cost, and noise that should be considered when deciding which method 
to use.23
HVAC systems filter air for the entire structure. The filters are typically installed in 
the return-air ducts in a specific filter rack either at the base of the air-handling unit or 
upstream in the return grills within the HVAC system. The filters only function when the 
system is operating. Most HVAC systems can run as long as needed to filter indoor air 
but are usually only operated when heating and cooling is necessary, which can be less 
than 25% of the time during heating and cooling seasons in residential structures.61,84  
In order for the system to filter indoor air during a wildfire, the HVAC system would 
need to run for longer periods (See Complimentary Methods to Improve Air Filtration 
Section). It can be relatively inexpensive to install a filter within an HVAC system. 
However, certain structures may need to have an HVAC installed or retrofitted in order 
to accommodate certain filters, which can be expensive. There is also a difference in price 
when comparing HVAC filtration technology for a home and a commercial building.23,63
Portable air cleaning devices are air filtration units that are designed to be mobile.  
Unlike HVAC systems, which filter air throughout the whole structure, portable air 
cleaners are designed to just clean the air in smaller spaces, such as individual rooms.  
In order to effectively reduce pollutants throughout the entire structure, multiple 
portable air cleaning devices may be needed due to this limitation. Portable cleaning 
devices can be activated for as long as necessary to improve the air quality within its 
vicinity. Portable cleaning devices are relatively cheap to install. Portable air cleaners 
A Summary for Health Departments
7
tend to generate a lot of noise which could be disruptive to some people if they expect 
to run the device overnight.23,63
For these devices to effectively filter particles, it is important to adhere to proper 
maintenance and filter replacement procedures. Maintenance neglect can inhibit 
functionality and performance of the devices. Any owner should follow the 
manufacturer recommendations when operating their air cleaning technology.63
Photo of HVAC units. 
Photo of a portable air cleaner. 
Efficiency and Effectiveness
When referring to air filtration and the use of portable air cleaners and HVAC system 
filters, it is important to understand the difference between effectiveness and efficiency. 
These measures are used to compare different technologies under similar conditions. 
The EPA defines an air cleaner’s efficiency as a fractional measure of its ability to  
reduce the concentration of pollutants in the air that passes once through the device. 
Efficiency is usually measured in a laboratory setting, where all variables for testing can 
be controlled.63
The effectiveness of an air cleaning device is a measure of its ability to remove 
pollutants from the spaces in which it is operated.  Effectiveness is used to describe an 
air cleaners’ function in real-world scenarios. Unlike efficiency, which is strictly tested 
in laboratory settings under highly controlled conditions, the effectiveness of an air 
cleaning device is dependent on factors such as its location, installation, air flow rate, 
and hours of operation.63
Standard Measures of Performance 
Multiple air cleaners are available to the general public, making it difficult to 
understand which cleaners are most effective in reducing air pollutants within certain 
structures.64 Currently, two main standards are used to measure performance for fibrous 
air cleaners: MERV and CADR. No standards for efficiency currently exist for electronic 
filters although testing standards are being created. Gas-phase filters are tested using 
the ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 14.1-2015 and 145.2-2016, but there are no rating metrics 
from the testing method.
Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
8
MERV: The Measure for HVAC Fibrous Filters 
Multiple measures are used to evaluate the efficiency of particle removal within fibrous 
filters. The most widely used fibrous media air filter test method for duct-mounted 
particle filters in the United States is the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating 
and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) Standard 52.2, which is a national 
consensus standard that evaluates the removal efficiency for particles 0.3 to 10 µm  
in diameter. Results are reported as a minimum efficiency reporting value (MERV) 
based on the average removal efficiency across three particle size ranges, which are 
0.3–1 µm, 1–3 µm, and 3–10 µm. The higher the MERV rating, the higher particle removal 
efficiency of the filter. Only MERV 11 filters and above are specifically tested for  
their ability to remove the smaller (0.3–1 µm) particles. MERV 11 filters must achieve  
at least 20% efficiency for 0.3–1 µm particles, while MERV 13 and above require at least 
50% efficiency for 0.3–1 µm particles.63 
CADR: Portable Air Cleaner Measure
Portable air cleaners have a metric that evaluates their effectiveness in reducing 
airborne pollutants from the air. The clean air delivery rate (CADR), which was 
developed by the Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers (AHAM), is a  
measure that estimates the filtration effectiveness of reducing particle concentrations 
in an occupied space, based on the maximum recommended floor area for the rated unit 
expressed in cubic feet per minute. Similar to the MERV rating, CADRs are calculated 
for three different size classes of particles: pollen (5 to 11 µm), dust (0.5 to 3 µm) and 
tobacco smoke (0.09 to 1.0 µm).  Typically, a person will want a portable air cleaner  
that is rated with a tobacco smoke CADR at least 2/3 of the room area in which it will be 
placed.  For example, a unit with a CADR of 200 is appropriate for a room size of  
300 ft2. Many of the portable air cleaners tested by AHAM have moderate to large 
CADR ratings for small particles. Units tested by AHAM carry a verified label 
suggesting the appropriate maximum room size for the cleaner.61,63
A Summary for Health Departments
9
Air Cleaning Technologies
Mechanical Filtration
Fibrous Media Filter 
According to ASHRAE, mechanical air filters use media with porous structures that 
contain fibers or stretched membrane material in a variety of fiber sizes, densities, and 
media extension configurations to remove particles from airstreams. Air is cleaned 
when particles enter a filter and attach to the media, removing the particles from the air 
as it passes through. The effectiveness of these filters in cleaning air is contingent on a 
multitude of factors (Figure 1). Fibrous air filters can be made from a variety of different 
materials that influence the effectiveness and efficiency of the filter.65 
Figure 1: Factors that influence fibrous air filtration
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
■Particle size
■Filter porosity
■Dust loading conditions
■Filter thickness
■Electrostatic media
■System/device runtime
■Airflow
Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
10
Fibrous Media Filter Types
MERV Ratings (ASHRAE Standard 52.2)86
MERV RATING
PARTICLE SIZE RANGE 
(µM)
EFFICIENCY
APPLICATION
1–4
3.0–10.0
<20%
Minimum Equipment 
Protection
5–8
3.0–10.0
≥20% to <85%
Minimum Particulate 
Protection
Residential Homes
Commercial 
Buildings
9–12
3.0–10.0
1.0–3.0 
≥85%
<50 to ≥80
Improved Particulate 
Protection
Industrial Buildings
Commercial 
Buildings
Residential Buildings
13–16
3.0–10.0
1.0–3.0
0.30–1.0
≥90%
>90%
<70 to ≥95
Superior Particulate 
Protection
Smoke Removal 
Healthcare Facilities
General Surgery 
Panel Filters (MERV 1–4) 
Flat or panel filters are inexpensive filters consisting of coarse glass fibers, coated 
animal hair, vegetable fibers, synthetic foams, metallic wools, synthetic fibers, or 
expanded metals and foils. Panel filters have very low efficiency to remove most particle 
sizes. These filters are commonly used in residential furnaces and air-conditioning 
systems. They are also used as pre-filters for more efficient filters. Given its efficiency, 
these filters are mostly used to protect HVAC equipment from buildup of materials in 
the machinery than protect occupants from particulate matter.63
Pleated, extended surface, and unpleated, pad filter (MERV 5–12)
Compared to panel filters, pleated/unpleated pad filters generally have a higher 
efficiency for most particle sizes. Pleating the filter increases its surface area and allows 
for the use of smaller fibers and increased density of the filter fibers without reducing 
airflow. The media used for pleated filters can be fiber mats, bonded glass fibers, 
synthetic fibers, cellulose fibers, wool felt, and other cotton-polyester material blends. 
These filters are more suitable for protecting occupants from certain types of particles 
like dust and pollen.63
A Summary for Health Departments
11
High efficiency filters (MERV 13 or higher)
High-efficiency filters will have a higher average airflow resistance than medium-
efficiency filters with the same thickness. The EPA recommends high efficiency filters 
for residential and commercial buildings for their ability to protect occupants from 
fine particulate matter. High Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) filters are categorized 
as MERV 16 under the ASHRAE Standard 52.2, but undergo more specific testing and 
are the most effective at removing fine and ultrafine particulate matter than lower rated 
filters. HEPA filters are better than a standard MERV 16 filter and are generally used 
in healthcare and industrial settings due to their efficiency in removing particles and 
more narrowly defined performance characteristics. A HEPA filter is standardized at a 
minimum 99.97% efficiency rating for removing particles at 0.3µm in diameter. Particles 
that are larger or smaller than 0.3µm are trapped at even higher efficiencies, which make 
HEPA filters effective in protecting occupants from particulate matter from smoke.61,63, 66
Gas-phase Filtration
Sorption Filters
Gas-phase air filters use a material with a high surface area called sorbent to capture 
gaseous pollutants. This is done through either adsorption or chemisorption. 
Adsorption is a process that results from the physical attraction of gas or vapor 
molecules to a surface. Chemisorption occurs when gas or vapor molecules chemically 
react with the sorbent material or with reactive agents impregnated into the sorbent.29 
The reaction forms compounds that can be bound to the media or broken down and 
released into the air. Activated carbon is the most common filter used in HVAC systems 
and portable cleaners for gaseous pollutant removal. It can potentially remove most 
hydrocarbons, ozone, aldehydes, and organic acids, but is not effective against oxides 
like sulfur, nitrogen oxide, and ammonia. Activated carbon filters are rarely found on 
their own in air cleaners. They are usually used in addition with another air cleaning 
technology, like a HEPA filter. Gas-phase filters are usually specifically designed 
to address one or a limited number of gaseous pollutants and need to be replaced 
frequently due to their limited lifespan. None are expected to remove all the gaseous 
pollutants present in a typical home.61,63
Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
12
Electronic Filtration
A few electronic air cleaning technologies can be used to filter indoor air pollutants: 
electrostatic precipitators, ionizers, and ozone generators. Currently there are no widely 
used standard measurements for the effectiveness of electronic air cleaners. 
Electrostatic Precipitators
Electrostatic precipitators (ESPs) are air cleaners that use an electrostatic process to 
charge particles, which make them become attracted to the oppositely charged plates 
inside the cleaner. ESPs remove and collect small airborne particles and often have an 
initial single pass removal efficiency of 60% or more for most particle sizes, depending 
on the airflow rate. ESPs can have different removal efficiencies for particles with 
different compositions. This is because different particles have different electrical 
properties that will affect their ability to hold a charge.63 
Ion Generator
Ion generators (Ionizers) use a high voltage wire or carbon fiber brush to electrically 
charge air molecules, which produces negative ions that attach to airborne particles. 
Ionizers are similar to ESPs but without the added collector, instead dispersing the 
negatively charged particles in the air. The charged particles can attach to nearby 
surfaces, like walls and furniture, or to one another and settle faster. Because ionizers 
don’t typically use fans to move air past the cleaner, their CADRs are usually low for 
most particle sizes. Ionizers can also be installed within HVAC systems.61,63
Ozone Generators
Both ESPs and ionizers can potentially produce ozone when operating. Ozone (O3) is 
a known pulmonary irritant.61 Positive associations have been found between ozone 
exposure and hospital admission visits for conditions such as pneumonia, asthma, 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and other respiratory illnesses. Increased 
exposure to ozone has also been correlated with premature mortality.36 Ozone, through 
potential secondary chemical reactions, can produce other harmful pollutants like 
formaldehyde, which has been associated with negative respiratory health effects.67  
The productions of this pollutant directly contrast with the goal of reducing harmful 
irritants within structures. Ozone generators intentionally produce ozone in order 
to create a chemical reaction with the harmful VOCs that produce a less harmful 
substance like carbon dioxide. However, given the potential harm that ozone can cause, 
ozone generators have not been recommended for use within structures.63,64,68 The 
California Air Resources Board (CARB) requires that all air cleaners sold in California 
be certified to meet electrical safety and ozone emissions standards and has created a 
list of certified air cleaners for public use (See Selected Resources).69 
A Summary for Health Departments
13
Effectiveness in Reducing Pollutant Concentrations 
A literature search was conducted to find relevant studies pertaining to the 
effectiveness of air cleaning technologies in substantially reducing air pollutants 
prevalent in wildfire smoke (see Appendix for methodology). The tables below 
summarize study characteristics and conclusions of highly relevant research. Detailed 
summaries of each study follow the tables.
Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
14
Effectiveness of Mechanical Filters on Air Pollution Reduction
Summary of Literature on Pollutant Reductions from Mechanical Filter Use
STUDY
STUDY CHARACTERISTICS
POLLUTANT EXPOSURE 
VARIABLE IMPACT
MAIN CONCLUSION
Barn et al. (2018)
Randomized control group, 
540 pregnant adult women, 
Residential apartments, 
portable HEPA filter air 
cleaner, Secondhand smoke 
pollution.
PM2.5 (29%)  
Portable air cleaners 
substantially reduced indoor 
 concentrations and 
PM2.5
secondhand smoke exposure.
Chuang et al. (2017)
Randomized crossover, 
422 adult homeowners, 
Residential Houses, 
Mongolia, HVAC with filter, 
General air pollution
PM2.5 (57%)  
VOC (33%)c  
Findings suggest that air 
conditioning with a HEPA filter 
can be a simple and useful 
method to reduce indoor air 
pollution.
Ward et al. (2017)
Three arm randomized 
placebo-controlled trial, 98 
residential homes, Portable 
HEPA filter air cleaner, Wood 
stove smoke pollution.
PM2.5 (68%)  
HEPA filter air cleaners were a 
relatively less expensive and 
more efficacious intervention 
than a wood stove changeout 
intervention for lowering 
exposure to wood stove 
pollutants.
Wheeler et al. (2014)a
Randomized case-control 
study, 31 residential homes, 
Canada, portable HEPA filter 
air cleaner, wood smoke 
pollution.
PM2.5 (52%)  
The use of HEPA air cleaners 
reduced exposures to indoor 
 resulting from both 
PM2.5
indoor and ambient wood 
smoke sources.
Allen et al. (2011)a
45 healthy adults, 
Randomized crossover, 
residential homes, portable 
HEPA filter air cleaner, wood 
smoke pollution.
PM2.5 (60%)  
Levoglucosan (75%)  
Proper air filtration (HEPA) 
can significantly reduce 
woodsmoke pollutants like 
PM2.5.
Xu et al. (2010)a
30 children with asthma, 
Residential homes, portable 
HEPA filter air cleaner, 
general air pollution.
PM10 (72%)  
VOC (59%)c  
CO2 (19%)  
Use of HEPA filter/ventilator 
proved to be effective in 
reducing particle and gas 
concentrations.
CO (30%)  
Barn et al. (2008)ab
38 homes affected by either 
wood smoke or forest fire 
smoke, British Columbia, 
89% CADR, portable HEPA 
air cleaner, wildfire & wood 
smoke pollution.
Avg. Summer Finf (57%)  
Avg. Winter Finf (79%)  
Avg. Both Finf (75%)  
Remaining indoors combined 
with use of HEPA filter air 
cleaner can effectively reduce 
 exposure during forest 
PM2.5
fires and residential smoke 
burning.
Eggleston et al. (2005). 
 Randomized controlled trial, 
HEPA air filter, Homes with 
asthmatic children
PM10 (39%)  
Environmental treatment 
reduced indoor airborne 
particulate matter.
a = (µg/m3)
b = Finf: PM Indoor infiltration rate
c= Specific filters weren’t designed to reduce VOCs, so reasons for VOC reduction are unclear.
A Summary for Health Departments
15
Barn et al. (2018)
A study was conducted to determine the effectiveness of portable HEPA filter air 
cleaners in reducing indoor particulate matter PM2.5 and secondhand smoke exposures 
among non-smoking pregnant women in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia. 540 participants were 
randomly assigned to an intervention group which received one or two HEPA filter air 
cleaners and a control group which received no air cleaners. The researchers monitored 
259 intervention and 253 control participants to the end of their pregnancy. Residential 
indoor and outdoor PM2.5 concentrations were measured in early and late pregnancy. 
The blood samples of 382 participants were collected by a nurse and analyzed for 
cadmium during late pregnancy. Hair samples were also collected and analyzed for 
nicotine as an indicator for secondhand smoke exposure. The researchers used a mixed-
effects and multiple linear regression models and used stratified models and interaction 
terms to evaluate potential modifiers of effectiveness. Indoor PM2.5 concentrations were 
29% lower in the intervention group. Blood cadmium concentrations were 14% lower 
in intervention group due to reduced pollutant exposure. Researchers concluded that 
HEPA filter air cleaners can lower indoor PM2.5 concentrations and secondhand smoke 
exposures in highly polluted settings.70
Chuang et al. (2017)
A study was conducted on whether there was an association between air pollution 
filtration and cardiovascular health. The researchers recruited 200 adult homemakers 
and randomly assigned 100 of them to either an air filtration intervention or control 
intervention. The subjects who were assigned to the air filtration group in 2013 were 
assigned to the control group in 2014, while the people who were assigned to the 
control group in 2013 were assigned to the filtration group in 2014. Measurements were 
taken for PM2.5 and total VOCs. The blood pressure of the participants was monitored, 
and blood samples were collected after air pollution monitoring. The researchers used 
mixed-effects models to investigate the associations among pollution measurements, 
biological markers, and blood pressures. The participants in the air filtration 
intervention group experienced less exposure to VOCs and PM2.5 and had improved 
cardiovascular health markers. Researchers concluded that long-term filtration lowered 
exposure to particulate matter and VOCs and affected cardiovascular health.71
Ward et al. (2017)
A study was conducted to assess the efficacy of residential interventions to reduce 
indoor particulate matter exposure from wood stoves. The researchers enacted a three-
arm randomized placebo-controlled trial, with the interventions of air filtration and 
wood stove changeouts being evaluated. The outcomes variables being monitored 
were PM2.5 concentrations and carbon monoxide. 16 homes received the wood stove 
changeout, 40 homes received a placebo filter, and 42 homes received the HEPA air 
cleaner. The variables were collected before and after the interventions and linear 
mixed models were used to account for the dependence of repeated measures of 
Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
16
indoor air quality in the same home and were used to evaluate whether pre- to post 
intervention changes in indoor air quality concentrations differed significantly by 
interventions. PM2.5 concentrations were reduced by 68% in the filtration intervention 
group, whereas no significant reductions in PM2.5 were observed in the placebo filter 
intervention group or wood stove changeout group. The researchers concluded 
that HEPA filter air cleaners were a relatively less expensive and more efficacious 
intervention for lowering exposure to wood stove pollutants.72
Wheeler et al. (2014)
A study was conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of air cleaners in reducing wood 
smoke associated PM2.5. Thirty-one homes were monitored for three consecutive 
days each, with two homes monitored concurrently per week. Homes were randomly 
assigned to a filtration intervention group and control group. Homes used their wood 
burning appliance as usual on day 1. On days 2 and 3, the wood smoke appliance was 
not operated, and the HEPA filter air cleaner was activated (if assigned to intervention 
group). The PM2.5 concentrations were monitored, along with the infiltration factor.  
The infiltration factor (Finf) is defined as the fraction of ambient particles that penetrate 
indoors and remain suspended under steady-state conditions. The researchers found 
that when the air cleaner was operating, the total indoor PM2.5 levels were significantly 
lower than in the control group, with median reductions of 52%. There was also a 
reduction in the median PM2.5 Finf from .56 to .26, suggesting that the HEPA filter  
air cleaner was responsible for increased PM deposition during filtration days.  
The researchers concluded that the use of HEPA air cleaners reduced exposures to 
indoor PM2.5 resulting from both indoor and ambient wood smoke sources.73 
Allen et al. (2011)
A study was conducted to assess a HEPA portable air filter’s effectiveness in 
lowering indoor pollutants from wood smoke and improving cardiovascular health 
outcomes. The researchers recruited 45 healthy adults and conducted a randomized 
crossover intervention study that exposed them to consecutive 7-day periods of 
filtered and nonfiltered air. PM2.5 was monitored for the indoor air pollutant measure.  
The researchers used mixed models to account for measurements clustered within 
individuals and individuals clustered within homes. They explored effect modification 
by filtration/placebo order, age, sex, overweight, time spent indoors at home, and  
wood stove use. Averages of indoor infiltration factor (Finf) for PM2.5 were significantly 
lower during HEPA filtration, with nearly 60% reductions in average concentrations. 
The HEPA filters reduced indoor PM2.5 in 24 of 25 homes and were associated with 
positive increases in selected cardiovascular health markers. The researchers concluded 
that proper air filtration can significantly reduce woodsmoke pollutants like PM2.5, 
which can favorably influence cardiovascular morbidity.74
Xu et al. (2010)
A study was conducted to monitor how a HEPA air cleaner/ventilator would improve 
respiratory health of children with asthma. Thirty children with asthma were recruited 
and randomly assigned to a control group and a filtration group. For the first six weeks 
the filtration group had air cleaning/ventilation units running in their bedrooms and 
the control group did not. During the second six weeks, both groups had air cleaning/
A Summary for Health Departments
17
ventilation units running. The parameters of indoor air quality were temperature, 
VOC, CO, CO2, and PM10 concentrations. The researchers monitored exhaled breath 
condensate (EBC) for nitrate and pH to measure pulmonary inflammation and 
peak expiratory flow (PEF). They also measured peak expiratory flow. ANOVA was 
performed on the raw health marker data to test the treatment levels for the different 
HEPA status (on/off). The researchers found that there were average reductions in the 
pollutants of PM10, VOCs, CO, and CO2 by 72%, 59%, 30%, and 19% respectively when the 
air cleaner was operating. There was also less pulmonary inflammation and an increase 
in PEF in the children who had an air cleaner/ventilator operating in the room. These 
results indicate that air cleaning in combination with ventilation can effectively reduce 
symptoms for asthma sufferers.75
Barn et al. (2008) 
A study was conducted to address the effectiveness of HEPA filter air cleaners on 
indoor pollutants from forest fires. The researchers collected valid indoor/outdoor 
1-minute PM2.5 averages and 48-hour outdoor PM2.5 samples for 19 winter and 13 summer 
homes impacted by wood burning and forest fire smoke respectively during 2004–2005. 
Portable HEPA filter air cleaners were operated indoors with the filter removed for one 
of two sampling days. The researchers conducted modeling in order to measure the 
indoor filtration factor (Finf) of PM2.5 from forest fires/wood smoke. Particle Finf and  
air cleaner effectiveness (ACE) were calculated for each home with a recursive model. 
The researchers found significantly lower Finf values in the homes when the air cleaner 
was run with the HEPA filter. PM2.5 was decreased with air cleaner use for 9 out of 10 
homes sampled in the summer and 14 out of 16 houses sampled in the winter.  
The researchers concluded that remaining indoors combined with use of a HEPA filter 
air cleaner can effectively reduce PM2.5 exposure during forest fires and residential 
smoke burning.76
Eggleston et al. (2005)
A study was conducted to monitor if reducing airborne pollutants inside homes would 
reduce asthma morbidity in children. An initial evaluation that included interviews, 
allergen tests, home inspections, and pollutant measurements was implemented to 
locate suitable candidates for the study.  100 asthmatic children were randomized 
to a treatment group, which were households that were provided with pest and mice 
extermination services, HEPA filters, and allergen-free mattress and pillow casings,  
and a control group, which received no interventions until after the 1 year period.  
The outcome variables monitored were particulate matter concentration, allergens,  
and asthma symptoms. The researchers evaluated the differences in outcomes between 
the two groups at 6 and 12 months. Within the treatment group, the PM10 concentrations 
decreased 30% at 6 months and 39% at 12 months in comparison to the respective 
8% and 5% increases in concentrations within control group. There were reductions 
in indoor allergen levels in the intervention group, as well. Daytime symptoms 
significantly decreased under the intervention group. Researchers concluded that a 
tailored, multifaceted environmental treatment reduced airborne particulate matter  
and indoor allergen levels in inner-city homes, which, in turn, had a modest effect  
on morbidity.77
Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
18
Effectiveness of Electrostatic Precipitators (ESP) on Air Pollutant 
Reduction 
Summary of Literature on Pollutant Reduction from ESP Use
STUDY
STUDY 
CHARACTERISTICS
POLLUTANT EXPOSURE 
VARIABLE IMPACT
MAIN CONCLUSION
Chen et al. (2015)a
Randomized, double 
blind crossover trial, 
35 nonsmoking college 
students, Shanghai 
college dormitories, 
portable ESP air cleaner, 
general air pollution. 
PM2.5 (57%) ▼
The intervention of air 
purification demonstrated 
clear cardio-pulmonary 
benefits among healthy 
adults in a Chinese city 
with severe ambient 
particulate air pollution.
Weichenthal et al. (2013)ab Crossover study, 37 
Canadian residents (20 
homes), portable ESP 
air cleaner, general air 
pollution.
Avg. PM10 (38%) ▼
Avg. PM2.5 (37%) ▼
Avg. PM1 (34%) ▼
BTEX (7%) ▼
Portable indoor air filters 
may offer substantial 
reductions in indoor 
particulate matter, and 
such reductions may be 
associated with improved 
lung function.
Hart et al. (2011)ac
Crossover study, two 
residential homes, 
portable ESP air cleaner, 
wood stove smoke 
pollution.
PM10 (61%, 78%) ▼
PM5 (63%, 81%) ▼
PM2.5 (61%,84%) ▼
PM1 (63%, 85%) ▼
A portable air cleaner 
may effectively reduce 
indoor particulate matter 
concentrations associated 
with wood combustion 
during home heating.
▼
PM0.5 (66%, 83%) 
▼
PM.0.3 (65%, 82%) 
Henderson et al. (2005)a
Randomized controlled 
trial, two residential 
homes, portable ESP air 
cleaner, wildfire smoke 
pollution.
▼
PM2.5 (63-88%) 
O3 (2-4ppm) ▲
Indoor air filtration in 
combination with closed 
windows is effective in 
reducing harmful wildfire 
smoke pollutant exposure.
a = (µg/m3)
b = BTEX: sum of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, xylenes
c = (Home A, Home B)
Chen et al. (2015)
A study was conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of ESP air cleaners in improving 
cardiopulmonary health in China. The researchers enacted a randomized, double- 
blind crossover trial among 35 healthy, nonsmoker college students in Shanghai.  
The students lived in 10 dormitory rooms that were randomly assigned into two 
groups of five. The groups alternated between using a real ESP air cleaner and a 
placebo cleaner for 48 hours with a two-week washout period (where no cleaner was 
being operated). The researchers monitored health impacts by measuring 14 markers 
for inflammation, coagulation, vasoconstriction, lung function, and blood pressure. 
A Summary for Health Departments
19
The researchers applied linear mixed-effect models to evaluate the effect of the air 
cleaners on health outcome variables. Air purification resulted in an average 57% 
reduction in PM2.5 concentration within hours of operation. Purification was also 
significantly associated with decreases in geometric means of multiple inflammatory 
and thrombogenic markers. The researchers concluded that the intervention of air 
purification demonstrated clear cardio-pulmonary benefits among healthy adults in a 
Chinese city with severe ambient particulate air pollution.78
Weichenthal et al. (2013)
A case-crossover study was conducted to examine how indoor air quality impacts 
cardiorespiratory health within First Nation communities. The researchers recruited 
37 residents within 20 homes. Each home was monitored over a three-week period and 
was provided an electrostatic precipitator air cleaner for 1 week, a placebo air filter 
for one week, and no filter (washout period) for one week. Pollution was measured by 
monitoring the weekly average particulate matter concentrations (PM1, PM10, PM2.5), 
VOCs concentrations, NO2 samples, and CO2 samples. Heath markers monitored 
were blood pressure, reactive hyperemia index (RHI) and forced expiratory flow. The 
researchers used linear model-effects models to examine the impact of indoor air filter 
use on weekly changes in clinical measures (excluding washout period) adjusted for 
potential time-varying factors. Indoor PM2.5, PM1, and PM10 decreased substantially 
during air filter weeks relative to placebo. Filtration had little impact on the other 
exposure pollutants monitored. The researchers concluded that portable indoor air 
filters may offer substantial reductions in indoor particulate matter, and that such 
reductions may be associated with improved lung function.79
Hart et al. (2011)
A study was conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of an electrostatic filter portable 
air cleaner in reducing the particulate matter (PM10, PM2.5, PM1) within homes where a 
wood stove is the sole heat source. The study was conducted in two homes in Montana 
that contained wood burning stoves. Sampling of PM2.5 counts and mass concentrations 
were conducted in each home for ten 24-hour periods. In each of the 24-hour periods, 
an ESP air cleaner was operated on high for 12 hours (half of the period duration). The 
remaining sample duration was conducted with the cleaner turned off. Occupants were 
told to record any activities conducted inside the houses that could potentially create 
more particulate matter. The researchers conducted multiple regression tests to analyze 
the data. Home A’s mean 12-hour particle count and particle mass concentrations were 
consistently lower when the air cleaner was on versus when it was off. The effectiveness 
of the ESP filter was demonstrated in all particle sizes, ranging from 61% to 68% 
reductions. House B’s mean 12-hour particle count and particle mass concentrations 
were also significantly reduced when the ESP air cleaner was operated. There were 
significant decreases in all particle sizes, ranging from 78% to 85% reductions. Findings 
suggest that an ESP portable air cleaner may effectively reduce indoor particulate 
matter concentrations associated with wood combustion during home heating.80
Henderson et al. (2005)
A study was conducted to understand the impacts of mitigation strategies for 
residences impacted by scheduled prescribed burns and wildfires. Indoor and outdoor 
Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
20
PM2.5 concentrations from pairs of residences were monitored during one prescribed 
burn and three wildfires during the 2002 fire season. The effect of ESP cleaners on 
indoor PM2.5 concentrations was investigated, with a cleaner being given to one of 
the houses in each pair. All occupants in the residences were told to keep all windows 
closed and to record all activities that may be a source of particulate matter (like 
cooking or cleaning). The researchers found that the homes that used the ESP cleaner 
had reduced concentrations of PM2.5 by a range of 63–88%. The researchers concluded 
that air filtration in combination with closed windows is an effective intervention for 
reducing exposure to the harmful pollutants of wildfire smoke and prescribed burns.81
Summary of Evidence 
Several studies found beneficial impacts of implementing HEPA filter air cleaners 
in order to reduce air pollutants prevalent in wildfire smoke. Most studies reported 
a statistically significant reduction in particulate matter and a few studies have 
reported reductions in other gaseous pollutants, such as VOCs and CO. In some 
cases, researchers also found modest improvements in cardiorespiratory function 
when implementing HEPA filter air cleaners. Based on the evidence, HEPA filter 
implementation can potentially reduce exposure to wildfire smoke pollutants and  
could mitigate negative health impacts. 
A moderate amount of literature supports the effectiveness of ESP air cleaners in 
reducing harmful air pollutants that are prevalent in wildfire smoke. Most studies 
found a significant reduction in particulate matter and certain VOCs when operating 
an ESP cleaner indoors. Henderson et al. (2005) cited noticeable ozone increases 
when operating the ESP cleaner. Even though the evidence suggests that ESP filters 
will reduce PM and pollutants in wildfire settings, the potential ozone production 
from some of the devices can be dangerous to residents and should be considered.67 
 
Referring to the CARB certified list of air cleaners when purchasing electronic air 
cleaners could potentially mitigate dangerous ozone production within structures.69
There is little evidence on gas-phase filters reducing wildfire smoke pollutants. Newer 
air cleaning devices usually have sorbent filters in a addition to HEPA filters. Gas phase 
air cleaners are not generally used by the general public and there are not any widely 
used standardized measures for performance for gas filters in structures. An evaluation 
of air cleaner effectiveness in reducing VOCs illustrated the efficiency of gas filters to 
reduce the concentration of VOCs was inconsistent even when using the same model. 
More research needs to be done on the effectiveness of gas filters in reducing harmful 
gaseous pollutants.64,82
Overall, HEPA filter and electrostatic precipitators seem to be effective in reducing 
exposure to air pollutants produced by wildfires and can potentially limit the negative 
health impacts from exposure as well. These findings are consistent with an evidence 
review conducted by Barn et al. (2016), who also found a significant amount of evidence 
to state that air filtration is an intervention that should be utilized during wildfires.60
A Summary for Health Departments
21
Complementary Methods to Improve  
Air Filtration 
In addition to using effective air filtration technology to reduce pollutants within 
structures, there are other methods that will aid in reducing exposure to harmful 
wildfire smoke. Listed in the figure below are methods that will help filter the air and 
create a “clean room” environment. 
Figure 2: Methods to help improve air quality in combination with air filtration23
 
 
 
■Stay indoors
■Keep windows and doors closed 
■Make sure air is not recycled from outsidea
• If you have an HVAC system with a fresh air intake, set the system to recirculate 
mode, or close the outdoor intake damper.81
• If you have a window air conditioner, close the outdoor air damper. If you cannot 
close the damper, do not use the window air conditioner. (Make sure that the seal 
between the air conditioner and the window is as tight as possible).81
• If you have an HVAC system which has a filter, you can set the fan to continuous 
operation to pull indoor air through the filter, even when the HVAC system is not 
actively heating or cooling or when the heat/cool is intermittent.61,84
• If you have a portable air conditioner with a single hose, typically vented out of a 
window, do not use it in smoky conditions. If you have a portable air conditioner 
with two hoses, make sure that the seal between the window vent kit and the 
window is as tight as possible.81
 
 
 
 
■Reduce activities that might increase pollutants (smoking, wood smoke, cooking, 
lighting candles) 
■Do not vacuum anywhere in the house unless using a HEPA-filter equipped vacuum
■Keep the room clean (use a damp cloth or mop)
■Ventilate the room once outside air quality is improved
a = Please refer to manufacturer for information on your specific air conditioning unit.
These methods highlighted in Figure 2 in combination with using air filtration 
technology will reduce harmful exposure to wildfire smoke pollutants and potentially 
improve health outcomes. In addition, there may be cases to where the air quality is so 
bad to where it is a direct harm to stay in certain structures, even with the appropriate 
measures. If that happens, it is more advantageous to relocate to a safer area with 
cleaner air.23
Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
22
Selected Resources
Wildfire Smoke: A Guide for Public Health Officials—EPA:30
https://www.airnow.gov/sites/default/files/2020-06/wildfire-smoke-guide-revised-2019.
pdf
Residential Air Cleaners Technical Summary—U.S. Environmental Protection Agency:63
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2018-07/documents/residential_air_
cleaners_-_a_technical_summary_3rd_edition.pdf
Guide to Air Cleaners in the Home—U.S. Environmental Protection Agency:61
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2014-07/documents/aircleaners.pdf
Integrated Science Assessment for Particulate Matter—U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency:21
https://www.epa.gov/isa/integrated-science-assessment-isa-particulate-matter
Air Cleaning Devices for the Home—California Air Resource Board:84
https://ww3.arb.ca.gov/research/indoor/acdsumm.pdf
Residential Air Cleaner Evidence Review—National Collaborating Centre for 
Environmental Health:63
http://www.ncceh.ca/sites/default/files/Air_Cleaners_Oct_2010.pdf
California Certified Air Cleaners – California Air Resource Board:69
https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/our-work/programs/air-cleaners-ozone-products/california-
certified-air-cleaning-devices
Filtration in Institutional Settings during Wildfire smoke events—British Columbia 
Centre for Disease Control:85
http://www.bccdc.ca/resource-gallery/Documents/Guidelines%20and%20Forms/
Guidelines%20and%20Manuals/Health-Environment/WFSG_EvidenceReview_
FiltrationinInstitutions_FINAL_v3_edstrs.pdf
New Guidance of Residential Air Cleaners—ASHRAE:66
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2019-09/documents/harriman_stephens_
brennan_-_new_guidance_for_residential_air_cleaners_-_ashrae_journal_sept-2019._
web_version.pdf
A Summary for Health Departments
23
Appendix
Methodology 
An initial peer-reviewed and grey literature search was conducted in the winter of 
2019-2020, utilizing Google Scholar. Additional subject matter expert input was 
received from internal CDC staff, and EPA staff. The literature search focused on 
finding relevant resources pertaining to climate change effects on wildfires, wildfire 
smoke exposure effects on human health, and literature focusing on the effectiveness of 
certain air cleaning technology and devices for reducing pollutants prevalent in wildfire 
smoke. Based on initial search and discussion with internal and external partners, a 
more comprehensive narrative review was conducted with the assistance of the CDC 
Library using CAB Abstracts, Embase, Medline, and Scopus. The Library found 1486 
sources using the designated search terms (Figure 3). All sources were reviewed, 
and the most relevant literature was compiled into a separate database which was 
used for the document. The database contained 200 articles. Additional articles were 
identified through snowball searching by examining citations and “cited by” references. 
Additional citations and resources were recommended by CDC staff, the author team, 
reviewers, and subject matter experts.
Figure 3: Literature Search Terms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
■Air cleaner
■Air filter
■Air purifier
■Air quality
■Asthma
■Cardiovascular 
■Children
■Climate change
 
 
 
 
 
 
■Electrostatic precipitator
■Elderly
■Fine particulate matter
■Health effects 
■HEPA
■High-efficiency
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
■Houses
■HVAC
■Industrial   
■Intervention
■Ionizer
■PAC
■Portable air cleaner
 
 
 
■Respiratory
■Schools
■Wildfire smoke
Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
24
References 
1.
Kinney, P. L. (2008). Climate Change, Air Quality, and Human Health. American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine, 35(5), 459-467. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2008.08.025
2.
Rossiello, M. R., & Szema, A. (2019). Health Effects of Climate Change-induced Wildfires and
Heatwaves. Cureus, 11(5), e4771.
3.
Jones, G. M., Gutiérrez, R. J., Tempel, D. J., Whitmore, S. A., Berigan, W. J., & Peery, M. Z. (2016).
Megafires: An Emerging Threat to Old-forest Species. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 14(6),
300-306. doi:10.1002/fee.1298
4.
Stephens, S. L., Burrows, N., Buyantuyev, A., Gray, R. W., Keane, R. E., Kubian, R., Lui, S., Seijo, F. Shu, L.,
Tolhurst, K. G., van Wagtendonk, J. W. (2014). Temperate and boreal forest mega-fires: characteristics
and challenges. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 12(2), 115-122. doi:10.1890/120332
5.
Department of Forestry and Fire Protection, U.S. (2019). Top 20 Most Destructive California Wildfires.
Retrieved from https://www.fire.ca.gov/media/11417/top20_destruction.pdf
6.
Department of Forestry and Fire Protection, U.S. (2019). Top 20 Largest California Wildifres. Retrieved
from https://www.fire.ca.gov/media/11416/top20_acres.pdf
7.
NIFC. (2018). Federal Firefighting Costs (Suppression Only). Retrieved from https://www.nifc.gov/
fireInfo/fireInfo_documents/SuppCosts.pdf
8.
GCRP, U. S. (2018). Our Changing Climate. In L. O. Mearns (Ed.), Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in 
the United States: Fourth National Climate Assessment (Vol. 2). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Global Change
Research Program.
9.
Abatzoglou, J. T., & Kolden, C. A. (2011). Climate Change in Western US Deserts: Potential for
Increased Wildfire and Invasive Annual Grasses. Rangeland Ecology & Management, 64(5), 471-478.
doi:10.2111/rem-d-09-00151.1
10.
Groot, W. J. d., Flannigan, M. D., & Stocks, B. J. (2013). Climate Change and Wildfires. Retrieved from
https://www.srs.fs.usda.gov/pubs/44494
11.
Harvey, B. J. (2016). Human-caused climate change is now a key driver of forest fire activity in the
western United States. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 113(42), 11649-11650.
12.
Williams, A. P., Abatzoglou, J. T., Gershunov, A., Guzman-Morales, J., Bishop, D. A., Balch, J. K.,
& Lettenmaier, D. P. (2019). Observed Impacts of Anthropogenic Climate Change on Wildfire in
California. Earth’s Future, 7(8), 892-910. doi:10.1029/2019ef001210
13.
Prieto-Parra, L., Yohannessen, K., Brea, C., Vidal, D., Ubilla, C. A., & Ruiz-Rudolph, P. (2017). Air
Pollution, PM2.5 Composition, Source Factors, and Respiratory Symptoms in Asthmatic and
Nonasthmatic Children in Santiago, Chile. Environment International, 101, 190-200.
14.
Godfree, R. C., Knerr, N., Godfree, D., Busby, J., Robertson, B., & Encinas-Viso, F. (2019). Historical
Reconstruction Unveils the Risk of Mass Mortality and Ecosystem Collapse during Pancontinental
Megadrought. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 116(31), 15580-15589. doi:10.1073/pnas.1902046116
15.
F.S, U.S. (2019). Safe and Effective Wildfire Response. Retrieved from https://www.fs.usda.gov/
managing-land/fire/response
16.
Romps, D. M., Seeley, J. T., Vollaro, D., & Molinari, J. (2014). Projected Increase in Ligtning Strikes in
the United States due to Global Warming. Science, 346(6211), 851-854.
17.
Balch, J. K., Bradley, B. A., Abatzoglou, J. T., Nagy, R. C., Fusco, E. J., & Mahood, A. L. (2017). Human-
started Wildfires Expand the Fire Niche across the United States. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 114(11),
2946-2951. doi:10.1073/pnas.1617394114
18.
Brey, S. J., Barnes, E. A., Pierce, J. R., Wiedinmyer, C., & Fischer, E. V. (2018). Environmental Conditions,
Ignition Type, and Air Quality Impacts of Wildfires in the Southeastern and Western United States.
Earth’s Future, 6, 1442–1456. https://doi.org/10.1029/2018EF000972
19.
Rodopoulou, S., Chalbot, M. C., Samoli, E., Dubois, D. W., San Filippo, B. D., & Kavouras, I. G. (2014). Air
Pollution and Hospital Emergency Room and Admissions for Cardiovascular and Respiratory Diseases
in Dona Ana County, New Mexico. Environmental Research, 129, 39-46.
A Summary for Health Departments
25
20. Sopko, P., Bradshaw, L., & Jolly, M. (2016). Spatial Products Available for Identifying Areas of Likely 
Wildfire Ignitions using Ligtning Location Data-Wildland Fire Assessment System (WFAS). Paper 
presented at the 24th International Lightning Detection Conference, San Diego, California, USA. 
21. EPA, U. S. (2017). Profile of Version 1 of the 2014 National Emissions Inventory. U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency. 
22. Youssouf, H., Liousse, C., Roblou, L., Assamoi, E. M., Salonen, R. O., Maesano, C., Banerjee, S., & 
Annesi-Maesano, I. (2014). Non-accidental Health Impacts of Wildfire Smoke. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 11(11), 11772–11804. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph111111772
23. EPA, U. S. (2019). Wildfire Smoke Guide for Public Health Officials. EPA: EPA 
24. Cascio, W. E. (2018). Wildland fire smoke and human health. Science of the Total Environment, 624, 586-
595. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.12.086
25. Stein, E. D., Brown, J. S., Hogue, T. S., Burke, M. P., & Kinoshita, A. (2012). Stormwater contaminant 
loading following southern California wildfires. Environ Toxicol Chem, 31(11), 2625-2638. doi:10.1002/
etc.1994
26. Mirabelli, M. C., Kunzli, N., Avol, E., Gilliland, F. D., Gauderman, W. J., McConnell, R., & Peters, J. M. 
(2009). Respiratory Symptoms Following Wildfire Smoke Exposure: Airway Size as a Susceptibility 
Factor. Epidemiology, 20(3), 451-459. doi:10.1097/EDE.0b013e31819d128d
27. Sapkota, A., Symons, J.M., Kleissl, J., Wang, L., Parlange, M.B., Ondov, J., Breysse, P.N., Diette, G., 
Eggleston, P.A., Buckley, T.J. (2005). Impact of the 2002 Canadian Forest Fires on PM Air Quality in 
Baltimore City. Environ. Sci. Tech. 39(1), 24-32.  
28. Black, C., Tesfaigzi, Y., Bassein, J. A., & Miller, L. A. (2017). Wildfire Smoke Exposure and Human 
Health: Significant Gaps in Research for a Growing Public Health Issue. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol, 
55, 186-195. doi:10.1016/j.etap.2017.08.022
29. Reisen, F., Duran, S. M., Flannigan, M., Elliott, C., & Rideout, K. (2015). Wildfire smoke and public health 
risk. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 24(8). doi:10.1071/wf15034
30. Johnston, F. H., Henderson, S. B., Chen, Y., Randerson, J. T., Marlier, M., Defries, R. S., Kinney, P., 
Bowman, D. M., & Brauer, M. (2012). Estimated Global Mortality Attributable to Smoke from Landscape 
Fires. Environmental Health Perspectives, 120(5), 695–701. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1104422
31. Kochi, I., Champ, P. A., Loomis, J. B., & Donovan, G. H. (2012). Valuing mortality impacts of smoke 
exposure from major southern California wildfires. Journal of Forest Economics, 18(1), 61-75. 
doi:10.1016/j.jfe.2011.10.002
32. Nunes, K. V., Ignotti, E., & Hacon Sde, S. (2013). Circulatory Disease Mortality Rates in the Elderly and 
Exposure to PM2.5 Generated by Biomass Burning in the Brazilian Amazon in 2005. Cadernos de 
Saude Publica, 29(3), 589-598. 
33. Sastry, N. (2002). Forest Fires, Air Pollution, and Mortality in Southeast Asia. Demography, 39(1), 1-23. 
34. DeFlorio-Barker, S., Crooks, J., Reyes, J., & Rappold, A. G. (2019). Cardiopulmonary Effects of Fine 
Particulate Matter Exposure among Older Adults, during Wildfire and Non-Wildfire Periods, in the 
United States 2008-2010. Environmental Health Perspectives, 127(3), 37006. 
35. Abdo, M., Ward, I., O’Dell, K., Ford, B., Pierce, J. R., Fischer, E. V., & Crooks, J. L. (2019). Impact of 
Wildfire Smoke on Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes in Colorado, 2007-2015. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health, 16(19). doi:10.3390/ijerph16193720
36. Dennekamp, M., & Abramson, M. J. (2011). The effects of bushfire smoke on respiratory health. 
Respirology, 16(2), 198-209. 
37. Gan, R. W., Lassman, W., Ford, B., Pfister, G., Magzamen, S., Fischer, E. V., & Pierce, J. R. (2017). Spatial 
and Temporal Estimates of Population Exposure to Wildfire Smoke during the Washington State 
2012 Wildfire Season using Blended Model, Satellite, and In Situ Data. GeoHealth, 1(3), 106-121. 
doi:10.1002/2017GH000049
38. Gan, R. W., Liu, J., Ford, B., O’Dell, K., Vaidyanathan, A., Wilson, A., Volckens, J., Pfister, G., Fischer, 
E.V., Pierce, J.R., Magzamen, S. (2020). The association between wildfire smoke exposure and asthma-
specific medical care utilization in Oregon during the 2013 wildfire season. J Expo Sci Environ 
Epidemiol. doi:10.1038/s41370-020-0210-x
Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
26
39. Adetona, O., Reinhardt, T. E., Domitrovich, J., Broyles, G., Adetona, A. M., Kleinman, M. T., Ottmar, 
R. D., & Naeher, L. P. (2016). Review of the Health Wffects of Wildland Fire Smoke on Wildland 
Firefighters and the Public. Inhalation Toxicology, 28(3), 95–139.
40. Adetona, O., Hall, D. B., & Naeher, L. P. (2011). Lung Function Changes in Wildland Firefighters 
Working at Prescribed Burns. Inhalation Toxicology, 23(13), 835-841. 
41. Reid, C. E., & Maestas, M. M. (2019). Wildfire Smoke Exposure Under Climate Change: Impact on 
Respiratory Health of Affected Communities. Current Opinion in Pulmonary Medicine, 25(2), 179-187. 
42. Alman, B. L., Pfister, G., Hao, H., Stowell, J., Hu, X., Liu, Y., & Strickland, M. J. (2016). The Association 
of Wildfire Smoke with Respiratory and Cardiovascular Emergency Department Visits in Colorado in 
2012: A Case Crossover Study. Environmental Health, 15(1). doi:10.1186/s12940-016-0146-8
43. Delfino, R. J., Brummel, S., Wu, J., Stern, H., Ostro, B., Lipsett, M., Winer, A., Street, D. H., Zhang, L., Tjoa, 
T., & Gillen, D. L. (2009). The Relationship of Respiratory and Cardiovascular Hospital Admissions to 
the Southern California Wildfires of 2003. Occupational and environmental medicine, 66(3), 189–197. 
https://doi.org/10.1136/oem.2008.041376
44. Wettstein, Z. S., Hoshiko, S., Fahimi, J., Harrison, R. J., Cascio, W. E., & Rappold, A. G. (2018). 
Cardiovascular and Cerebrovascular Emergency Department Visits Associated With Wildfire Smoke 
Exposure in California in 2015. Journal of the American Heart Association, 7(8), 11. 
45. Brook, R. D., Rajagopalan, S., Pope, C. A., 3rd, Brook, J. R., Bhatnagar, A., Diez-Roux, A. V., Holguin, F., 
Hong, Y., Luepker, R. V., Mittleman, M. A., Peters, A., Siscovick, D., Smith, S. C., Jr, Whitsel, L., Kaufman, 
J. D., & American Heart Association Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, Council on the Kidney 
in Cardiovascular Disease, and Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity and Metabolism (2010). 
Particulate matter Air Pollution and Cardiovascular Disease: An Update to the Scientific Statement 
from the American Heart Association. Circulation, 121(21), 2331–2378. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIR.0b013e3181dbece1
46. Stowell, J. D., Geng, G., Saikawa, E., Chang, H. H., Fu, J., Yang, C. E., Zhu, Q., Liu, Y., & Strickland, M. J. 
(2019). Associations of Wildfire Smoke PM2.5 Exposure with Cardiorespiratory Events in Colorado 
2011-2014. Environment International, 133(Pt A), 105151. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2019.105151
47. Glinianaia, S. V., Rankin, J., Bell, R., Pless-Mulloli, T., & Howel, D. (2004). Particulate Air Pollution 
and Fetal Health: A Systematic Review of the Epidemiologic Evidence. Epidemiology, 15(1), 36-45. 
doi:10.1097/01.ede.0000101023.41844.ac
48. Black, C., Gerriets, J. E., Fontaine, J. H., Harper, R. W., Kenyon, N. J., Tablin, F., Schelegle, E. S., & Miller, 
L. A. (2017). Early Life Wildfire Smoke Exposure Is Associated with Immune Dysregulation and Lung 
Function Decrements in Adolescence. American Journal of Respiratory Cell and Molecular Biology, 
56(5), 657–666. https://doi.org/10.1165/rcmb.2016-0380OC
49. Künzli, N., Avol, E., Wu, J., Gauderman, W. J., Rappaport, E., Millstein, J., Bennion, J., McConnell, 
R., Gilliland, F. D., Berhane, K., Lurmann, F., Winer, A., & Peters, J. M. (2006). Health Effects of the 
2003 Southern California Wildfires on Children. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care 
Medicine, 174(11), 1221–1228. https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.200604-519OC
50. Hutchinson, J. A., Vargo, J., Milet, M., French, N. H. F., Billmire, M., Johnson, J., & Hoshiko, S. (2018). 
The San Diego 2007 Wildfires and Medi-Cal Emergency Department Presentations, Inpatient 
Hospitalizations, and Outpatient Visits: An Observational Study of Smoke Exposure Periods and a 
Bidirectional Case-crossover Analysis. PLoS Med, 15(7), e1002601. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1002601
51. Le, G., Breysse, P.N., Eftim, S., McDermott, A., Geyh, A., Berman, J., Curriero, F. (2014) Canadian Forest 
Fires and the Effects of Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution on Hospitalizations Among the 
Elderly. Journal of Geo-Information Special Issue:  Remote Sensing and Geospatial Technologies in 
Public Health, 3(2), 713-731.
52. Liu, J. C., Wilson, A., Mickley, L. J., Ebisu, K., Sulprizio, M. P., Wang, Y., Peng, R. D., Yue, X., Dominici, 
F., & Bell, M. L. (2017). Who Among the Elderly Is Most Vulnerable to Exposure to and Health Risks 
of Fine Particulate Matter From Wildfire Smoke?. American journal of epidemiology, 186(6), 730–735. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwx141
53. Finlay, S. E., Moffat, A., Gazzard, R., Baker, D., & Murray, V. (2012). Health Impacts of Wildfires. PLoS 
Currents, 4, e4f959951cce959952c. 
A Summary for Health Departments
27
54. Reid, C. E., Considine, E. M., Watson, G. L., Telesca, D., Pfister, G. G., & Jerrett, M. (2019). Associations 
Between Respiratory Health and Ozone and Fine Particulate Matter during a Wildfire Event. 
Environment International, 129, 291-298. 
55. Vora, C., Renvall, M. J., Chao, P., Ferguson, P., & Ramsdell, J. W. (2011). 2007 San Diego Wildfires and 
Asthmatics. Journal of Asthma, 48(1), 75-78. 
56. Rapheal, D. (2011). Poverty in Childhood and Adverse Health Outcomes in Adulthood. Maturitas, 
69(1), 22-26. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2011.02.011
57. Nawrotzki, R. J., Brenkert-Smith, H., Hunter, L. M., & Champ, P. A. (2013). Wildfire-Migration Dynamics: 
Lessons from Colorado’s Fourmile Canyon Fire. Society & Natural Resources, 27(2), 215-225. doi:10.1080
/08941920.2013.842275
58. Ojerio, R., Moseley, C., Lynn, K., & Bania, N. (2011). Limited Involvement of Socially Vulnerable 
Populations in Federal Programs to Mitigate Wildfire Risk in Arizona. Natural Hazards Review, 12, 28-
36. doi:10.1061/共ASCE共NH.1527-6996.0000027
59. Insitute of Medicine, U. S. (1988). Health Problems of Homeless People. In Homelessness, Health, and 
Human Needs (pp. 39-70). Washington D.C.: National Academies Press (US).
60. Barn, P. K., Elliott, C. T., Allen, R. W., Kosatsky, T., Rideout, K., & Henderson, S. B. (2016). Portable Air 
Cleaners Should be at the Forefront of the Public Health Response to Landscape Fire Smoke. Environ 
Health, 15(1), 116. doi:10.1186/s12940-016-0198-9
61. EPA, U. S. (2008). Guide to Air Cleaners in the Home. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
62. EPA, U. S. (2018). Guide to Air Cleaners in the Home. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
63. EPA, U. S. (2018). Residential Air Cleaners: A Technical Summary. U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency.
64. Barn, P. (2010). Residential Air Cleaner Use to Improve Indoor Air Quality and Health: A Review of the 
Evidence. British Columbia Centre for Disease Control: British Columbia Centre for Disease Control. 
Retrieved from http://www.ncceh.ca/sites/default/files/Air_Cleaners_Oct_2010.pdf
65. ASHRAE. (2015). ASHRAE Position Document on Filtration and Air Cleaning. Retrieved from https://
www.ashrae.org/file%20library/about/position%20documents/filtration-and-air-cleaning-pd.pdf
66. ASHRAE. (2019). New Guidance for Residential Air Cleaners. Retreived from https://www.epa.gov/
sites/production/files/2019-09/documents/harriman_stephens_brennan_-_new_guidance_for_
residential_air_cleaners_-_ashrae_journal_sept-2019._web_version.pdf
67. Institute of Medicine. 2011. Climate Change, the Indoor Environment, and Health. Washington, DC: 
The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/13115
68. Macintosh, D. L., Myatt, T. A., Ludwig, J. F., Baker, B. J., Suh, H. H., & Spengler, J. D. (2008). Whole 
House Particle Removal and Clean Air Delivery Rates for In-Duct and Portable Ventilation Systems. J 
Air Waste Manag Assoc, 58(11), 1474-1482. doi:10.3155/1047-3289.58.11.1474
69. CARB. (2020). California Certified Air Cleaning Devices. California Air Resource Board. Retrieved 
from https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/our-work/programs/air-cleaners-ozone-products/california-certified-air-
cleaning-devices
70. Barn, P., Gombojav, E., Ochir, C., Laagan, B., Beejin, B., Naidan, G., Boldbaatar, B., Galsuren, J., Byambaa, 
T., Janes, C., Janssen, P. A., Lanphear, B. P., Takaro, T. K., Venners, S. A., Webster, G. M., Yuchi, W., 
Palmer, C. D., Parsons, P. J., Roh, Y. M., & Allen, R. W. (2018). The Effect of Portable HEPA Filter Air 
Cleaners on Indoor PM2.5 Concentrations and Second Hand Tobacco Smoke Exposure among 
Pregnant Women in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: The UGAAR Randomized Controlled Trial. The Science of 
the Total Environment, 615, 1379–1389. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.09.291
71. Chuang, H. C., Ho, K. F., Lin, L. Y., Chang, T. Y., Hong, G. B., Ma, C. M., Liu, I. J., & Chuang, K. J. (2017). 
Long-term Indoor Air Conditioner Filtration and Cardiovascular Health: A Randomized Crossover 
Intervention Study. Environment International, 106, 91-96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2017.06.008
72. Ward, T. J., Semmens, E. O., Weiler, E., Harrar, S., & Noonan, C. W. (2017). Efficacy of Interventions 
Targeting Household Air Pollution from Residential Wood Stoves. Journal of Exposure Science & 
Environmental Epidemiology, 27(1), 64-71. 
Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
28
73. Wheeler, A. J., Gibson, M. D., MacNeill, M., Ward, T. J., Wallace, L. A., Kuchta, J., Seaboyer, M., Dabek-
Zlotorzynska, E., Guernsey, J. R., & Stieb, D. M. (2014). Impacts of Air Cleaners on Indoor Air Quality 
in Residences Impacted by Wood Smoke. Environmental science & technology, 48(20), 12157–12163. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/es503144h
74. Allen, R. W., Carlsten, C., Karlen, B., Leckie, S., van Eeden, S., Vedal, S., Wong, I., & Brauer, M. (2011). 
An Air Filter Intervention Study of Endothelial Function Among Healthy Adults in a Woodsmoke-
Impacted Community. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 183(9), 1222–1230. 
https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.201010-1572OC
75. Xu, Y., Raja, S., Ferro, A. R., Jaques, P. A., Hopke, P. K., Gressani, C., & Wetzel, L. E. (2010). Effectiveness 
of Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning System with HEPA Filter Unit on Indoor Air 
Quality and Asthmatic Children’s Health. Building and Environment, 45(2), 330-337. doi:10.1016/j.
buildenv.2009.06.010
76. Barn, P., Larson, T., Noullett, M., Kennedy, S., Copes, R., & Brauer, M. (2008). Infiltration of Forest 
Fire and Residential Wood Smoke: An Evaluation of Air Cleaner Effectiveness. J Expo Sci Environ 
Epidemiol, 18(5), 503-511. doi:10.1038/sj.jes.7500640
77. Eggleston, P. A., Butz, A., Rand, C., Curtin-Brosnan, J., Kanchanaraksa, S., Swartz, L., Breysse, P., 
Buckley, T., Diette, G., Merriman, B., & Krishnan, J. A. (2005). Home environmental intervention in 
inner-city asthma: a randomized controlled clinical trial. Annals of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology: 
Official Publication of the American College of Allergy, Asthma, & Immunology, 95(6), 518–524. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S1081-1206(10)61012-5
78. Chen, R., Zhao, A., Chen, H., Zhao, Z., Cai, J., Wang, C., Yang, C., Li, H., Xu, X., Ha, S., Li, T., & Kan, H. 
(2015). Cardiopulmonary Benefits of Reducing Indoor Particles of Outdoor Origin: A Randomized, 
Double-blind Crossover Trial of Air Purifiers. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 65(21), 
2279–2287. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2015.03.553
79. Weichenthal, S., Mallach, G., Kulka, R., Black, A., Wheeler, A., You, H., St-Jean, M., Kwiatkowski, R., 
& Sharp, D. (2013). A Randomized Double-blind Crossover Study of Indoor Air Filtration and Acute 
Changes in Cardiorespiratory Health in a First Nations Community. Indoor Air, 23(3), 175–184. https://
doi.org/10.1111/ina.12019
80. Hart, J. F., Ward, T. J., Spear, T. M., Rossi, R. J., Holland, N. N., & Loushin, B. G. (2011). Evaluating 
the Effectiveness of a Commercial Portable Air Purifier in Homes with Wood Burning Stoves: A 
Preliminary Study. Journal Of Environmental & Public Health, 2011, 324809. 
81. Henderson, D. E., Milford, J. B., & Miller, S. L. (2005). Prescribed Burns and Wildfires in Colorado: 
Impacts of Mitigation Measures on Indoor Air Particulate Matter. Journal of the Air & Waste 
Management Association, 55(10), 1516-1526. 
82. Chen, W., Zhang, J. S., & Zhang, Z. (2005). Performance of Air Cleaners for Removing Multiple Volatile 
Organic Compounds in Indoor Air. ASHRAE Transactions: Symposia, 1101-1114. 
83. EPA, U.S. (2020). Wildfires and Indoor Air Quality. Environmental Protection Agency. Retrieved from 
https://www.epa.gov/indoor-air-quality-iaq/wildfires-and-indoor-air-quality-iaq
84. CARB. (2014). Air Cleaning Devices for the Home. California Air Resources Board. Retreived from 
https://ww3.arb.ca.gov/research/indoor/acdsumm.pdf
85. CDC, B.C. (2014). Evidence Review: Filtration in Institutional Setting During Wildfire Smoke Events. 
British Columbia Centre for Disease Control. Retreived from http://www.bccdc.ca/resource-gallery/
Documents/Guidelines%20and%20Forms/Guidelines%20and%20Manuals/Health-Environment/
WFSG_EvidenceReview_FiltrationinInstitutions_FINAL_v3_edstrs.pdf
86. ASHRAE. (n.d.). Top Ten Things Consumers Should Know About Their Air Conditioning. Retrieved 
from https://www.ashrae.org/technical-resources/free-resources/top-ten-things-consumers-should-
know-about-air-conditioning
87. NAFA. (2018). Understanding MERV | NAFA User’s Guide to ANSI/ASHRAE 52.2. Retrieved from 
https://www.nafahq.org/understanding-merv-nafa-users-guide-to-ansi-ashrae-52-2/
A Summary for Health Departments
29
Evidence on the Use of Indoor Air Filtration as an Intervention for Wildfire Smoke Pollutant Exposure
30
