Guide for 
Healthcare Professionals
Strategies to Help People with Asthma Achieve Better Health
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC’s) National Asthma Control 
Program created this Guide to assist healthcare professionals in using CDC’s 
EXHALE strategies to help people with asthma achieve better health outcomes. 
EXHALE
• Is a set of six strategies 
that each contribute to 
better asthma control.
• Can help both children and 
adults with asthma.
• Can have the greatest impact 
when multiple strategies are 
used together.
This Guide explains how healthcare 
professionals can use EXHALE strategies, 
individually or in combination, to help 
people with asthma achieve better health 
outcomes. This guide is a summary of 
resources to support use of EXHALE 
strategies. Every person with asthma does 
not necessarily need every strategy. 
Healthcare professionals have the power 
to improve the health of people with 
asthma through high-quality care, asthma 
self-management education, and referrals 
to available support services. Healthcare 
professionals can engage partners with the 
shared goal of helping children and adults 
with asthma.
1
                  
Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention
National Center for 
Environmental Health
• Is a set of six strategies 
that each contribute to 
better asthma control.
• Can help both children and 
adults with asthma.
• Can have the greatest impact 
when multiple strategies are 
used together.
Guide for 
Healthcare Professionals
Strategies to Help People with Asthma Achieve Better Health
2
Welcome to
CDC’s National Asthma Control Program (NACP) and its partners help
Americans with asthma achieve better health and improved quality of life.
NACP developed EXHALE, a set of six strategies that each contribute to
better asthma control.
EXHALE strategies can improve health
Each EXHALE strategy can reduce asthma-related 
hospitalizations, emergency department (ED) visits, 
and missed days of work or school. 
Healthcare professionals can use EXHALE 
to help people with asthma achieve better health
What are the 
EXHALE strategies?
Education 
on asthma self-management
X-tinguishing 
smoking and exposure to secondhand smoke
Home 
visits for trigger reduction and asthma 
self-management education
Achievement 
of guidelines-based medical management
Linkages 
and coordination of care across settings
Environmental 
policies or best practices to reduce asthma triggers 
from indoor, outdoor, or occupational sources
3
The Role of Healthcare 
Professionals in Asthma Control
Managing a chronic condition like asthma depends on 
education, environment, behavior, and social factors. 
Each person with asthma has a unique set of triggers 
that causes them to experience symptoms. 
Healthcare professionals can guide people with asthma 
and their communities to follow best practices to help 
people with asthma. Healthcare professionals can help 
reduce the morbidity and mortality of asthma by using 
the EXHALE strategies. 
This Guide will explain how EXHALE-related interventions 
can help healthcare professionals improve the health of 
people with asthma. 
4
Table of Contents
How EXHALE Can Help Healthcare Professionals......................................................... 5
Examples of How Healthcare Professionals  
and the Healthcare Team Can Use EXHALE.................................................................. 6
How Program Evaluation Can Help with EXHALE........................................................... 8
Selected Resources Related to EXHALE.......................................................................9
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Selected Information About  
Education on Asthma Self-Management........................................................... 11
Appendix 2: Selected Information About  
Achievement of Guidelines-Based Medical Management................................... 15
5
How EXHALE Can Help 
Healthcare Professionals
Healthcare professionals have an important role in improving the health of people with 
asthma. EXHALE can help.
Each EXHALE strategy has: 
• Reduced hospitalizations and ED visits. 
• Reduced missed days of work or school. 
• Improved medication adherence.*
*Environmental policies or best practices to reduce asthma  
triggers from indoor, outdoor, or occupational sources is the  
only EXHALE strategy that has not been linked to improved  
medication adherence.
How can EXHALE be used during 
busy clinical practice?
• Members of the healthcare team can work together 
to use EXHALE (examples are provided on the  
next page). 
• Patients with asthma, their families, and their 
caregivers can be given the EXHALE Guide designed 
for them.  
• Every person with asthma does not necessarily need 
every strategy. More resource-intensive services (such 
as home visits) can be focused on people at higher risk 
of asthma attacks. 
• Many health departments have asthma programs that 
can help connect patients with asthma, their families, 
and their caregivers to available EXHALE-related  
services; for asthma program contact information, 
visit https://www.cdc.gov/asthma/contacts. 
EXHALE can have the greatest impact when:
• Multiple EXHALE strategies are used together in 
every community.
• Healthcare professionals, health insurance plan 
administrators, public health professionals, school 
personnel, patients with asthma, their families, 
and other community members work together in 
using EXHALE.
Other EXHALE Guides are 
available for:
• People with asthma, their families, and 
their caregivers. 
• Healthcare system executive leaders.
• Managed care leaders and staff.
• Medicaid and Children’s Health 
Insurance Program leaders. 
• Public health professionals.
• Schools. 
These Guides are available at: 
https://www.cdc.gov/asthma/exhale/
6
Examples of How Healthcare Professionals 
and the Healthcare Team Can Use EXHALE
E ducation on asthma self-management
• Teach patients with asthma, their families, and their 
caregivers to manage asthma by using a personalized 
action plan.
• Refer patients with asthma, their families, and their 
caregivers to existing asthma self-management 
education (AS-ME) programs.
• Receive training and/or become certified in delivering 
AS-ME.
• Investigate and consider using available medical 
billing codes that can be used for AS-ME.
For more information about these examples, please see 
Appendix 1.
X -tinguishing smoking and 
exposure to secondhand smoke
• Routinely screen:
◦Patients with asthma for tobacco use and 
exposure to secondhand smoke.
◦Family members and caregivers of patients 
with asthma for tobacco use.
• Provide guideline-based cessation treatment including 
behavioral counseling (individual, group, or telephone-
based) and cessation medications approved by the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration to patients with 
asthma, family members, and caregivers who use 
tobacco.
• Connect patients with asthma, family members, and 
caregivers who use tobacco to community tobacco 
cessation services, including state quitlines  
for more intensive assistance (English: 1-800-QUIT-
NOW or 1-800-784-8669; Spanish: 1-855-DEJELO-YA  
or 1-855-335-3569; Mandarin and Cantonese: 1-800-
838-8917; Korean: 1-800-556-5564; Vietnamese: 
1-800-778-8440).
• Encourage smokefree policies, which can support 
tobacco cessation and reduce exposure to second-
hand smoke. More information is available in the 
section Environmental policies or best practices to 
reduce asthma triggers from indoor, outdoor, or 
occupational sources. 
H ome visits for trigger reduction and 
asthma self-management education
• Refer patients with asthma (such as patients with 
frequent ED visits or hospitalizations for asthma), 
their families, and their caregivers to existing 
asthma-related home visit programs. Many health 
departments have asthma programs that can provide 
information on existing home visit programs for 
asthma; for asthma program contact information, 
visit https://www.cdc.gov/asthma/contacts.
• Encourage local home visit programs for asthma to 
use the Home Characteristics and Asthma Triggers 
Checklist for Home Visitors (English version), which 
is also available in Spanish, includes low-cost steps 
to reduce asthma triggers, and has a related, 
standardized training for home visitors here.
7
Examples of How Healthcare Professionals Can Use EXHALE (continued)
•
A chievement of guidelines-based  
medical management
• Receive training in delivering guidelines-based medical 
management of asthma. Examples of available online 
trainings are provided in Appendix 2.
• Review inhaler technique (if applicable) with patients 
with asthma, their families, and their caregivers, which 
can be reinforced with CDC’s videos on “Know How to 
Use Your Asthma Inhaler.”
• Use decision-support tools (such as treatment 
algorithms, system reminders, and pocket-sized 
guidelines summaries) and shared decision-making (in 
which healthcare professionals work with patients to 
decide on treatment) when caring for patients with 
asthma.
• Participate in quality improvement activities to 
improve care for patients with asthma. Some health 
departments have asthma control programs that can 
be partners in healthcare quality improvement for 
patients with asthma. Contact information for 
selected state, territorial, and local asthma control 
programs in health departments is available at https://
www.cdc.gov/asthma/contacts. 
L inkages and coordination of care 
across settings
• Refer patients with asthma, their families, and their
caregivers to available support services (when
applicable) such as prescription assistance programs
that offer reduced costs for prescription medications.
Health departments can help people register for
available support services.
• Use a patient-centered medical home model (which
prioritizes coordinated care) to deliver primary care.
• Improve communication and coordination with local
schools about caring for children with asthma (for
example, by creating and sharing asthma action
plans).
E nvironmental policies or best practices to 
reduce asthma triggers from indoor, 
outdoor, or occupational sources
Inform community leaders about successful policies 
or practices that help people with asthma, including: 
◦Home weatherization assistance programs that
provide loans or grants to low-income residents
to repair or improve their homes, which can
reduce asthma triggers in their homes (such as
mold and pests).
◦Smokefree policies, including:
▪Comprehensive smokefree policies that
prohibit smoking in all indoor spaces of
workplaces, restaurants, bars, and public
and private multi-unit housing (including
apartment buildings). Additionally,
healthcare professionals can adopt,
implement, and enforce comprehensive
smokefree policies that prohibit use of all
tobacco products in hospital and clinic
buildings, as well as on hospital and clinic
property. An example policy for a healthcare
facility can be found here.
▪Smokefree rules that prohibit smoking in
homes and vehicles.
◦Modifying older diesel engines of school buses
to run more cleanly to reduce air pollution.
◦Eliminating, when possible, or reducing exposure
to asthma triggers in the workplace.
8
How Program Evaluation Can Help with EXHALE
Program evaluation can show how well EXHALE-related efforts are helping people with asthma and how these 
efforts can be improved. Healthcare professionals might be asked to participate in program evaluation conducted 
by the health department. Also, healthcare teams might opt to carry out evaluation activities on their own (such as 
quality improvement activities).  
Examples of questions that healthcare professionals can use for program evaluation include:
• Are patients with asthma, their families, and their caregivers receiving AS-ME and other referrals they need to 
prevent asthma attacks? 
• Are members of the healthcare team appropriately trained to deliver guidelines-based medical management and 
use decision support tools as indicated?  
• Is asthma care coordinated across healthcare organizations, schools, the health department, and other entities? 
What gaps exist?  
• Are there additional opportunities to share information with community leaders about successful policies 
and practices?
Evaluation is a learning process that can be integrated into routine practices. Good evaluations are systematic, 
follow a standard framework (such as the CDC Framework for Program Evaluation in Public Health), and involve 
the people who are working with or served by the program. More information and resources on program evaluation 
can be found at https://www.cdc.gov/asthma/program_eval/default.htm.
EXHALE can address social 
determinants of health
Multiple EXHALE strategies can improve 
conditions in the places where people live, 
work, learn, play, and spend time. 
For example: 
• Strategies addressing asthma triggers (such as 
Home visits for trigger reduction and asthma 
self-management education and Environmental 
policies or best practices to reduce asthma 
triggers from indoor, outdoor, or occupational 
sources) can improve conditions in homes, 
schools, workplaces, and other settings.
• The strategy Linkages and coordination of care 
across settings includes connecting people 
with asthma to local support services that can 
improve housing conditions and thereby reduce 
asthma triggers, such as home weatherization 
assistance programs.
9
• 
Selected Resources Related to EXHALE
Resources related to multiple EXHALE strategies: 
• CDC’s EXHALE: A Technical Package to Control Asthma, which describes EXHALE and the supporting 
evidence in detail.
• CDC’s 6|18 Initiative: Control Asthma, which describes how CDC is working with healthcare partners to 
improve health and control health care costs among people with asthma.
• CDC Vital Signs: Asthma in Children, which describes how asthma affects U.S. children and what can be 
done to help.
E ducation on asthma self-management
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 
Technical Brief on AS-ME packages, which describes 
the features of and evidence for some available  
AS-ME trainings.
X -tinguishing smoking and exposure 
to secondhand smoke
• CDC’s Smoking & Tobacco Use: Healthcare Provider 
Resources provides resources intended to help 
providers integrate cessation into their practice and 
ensure that patients have the right tools to begin their 
quit journeys. 
• CDC’s Smoking & Tobacco Use: Education and 
Training includes training resources offering 
evidence-based information and practical advice 
to help patients quit tobacco. 
• CDC’s Smoking & Tobacco Use: Quitlines and Other 
Cessation Support Resources features facts and 
FAQs on quitlines and other cessation support 
resources, such as apps or texting programs.
•  The Million Hearts® Tobacco Cessation Change 
Package has many tools and resources for clinical care. 
• U.S. Preventive Services Task Force’s Tobacco 
Smoking Cessation in Adults, Including Pregnant 
Women: Behavioral and Pharmacotherapy 
Interventions.
• U.S. Public Health Service’s Clinical Practice Guideline 
for Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence: 2008 
Update. 
H ome visits for trigger reduction and 
asthma self-management education
• Home Characteristics and Asthma Triggers Checklist 
for Home Visitors (English version), created by CDC, 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and  
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 
(Spanish version here; standardized home visit 
training in English here).
• CDC’s Strategies for Addressing Asthma in Homes, 
which includes core elements of home visits for 
asthma.
A chievement of guidelines-based  
medical management
• American Academy of Family Physicians’ METRIC® 
Module: Asthma.
• American Academy of Pediatrics’ Asthma: Quality 
Improvement Resources & Tools.
• Elward KS, “Asthma Days: An Approach to Planned 
Asthma Care”, Family Practice Management (2004), 
which describes how one clinical practice 
improved asthma care for people with asthma.
Smokefree policies can support tobacco 
cessation and reduce exposure to secondhand 
smoke. Related resources are available below, 
under Environmental policies or best practices 
to reduce asthma triggers from indoor, outdoor, 
or occupational sources.
10
Selected Resources Related to EXHALE (continued)
L inkages and coordination of care across settings
• American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology’s School-Based Asthma Management Program (SAMPRO), 
which includes tools to improve care coordination between healthcare organizations and schools.
• National Association of State Boards of Education’s How Schools Work and How to Work with Schools, which 
includes practical steps for working with schools.
• Neighborhood Navigator, an interactive tool that identifies community resources by zip code. Neighborhood 
Navigator is available through the American Academy of Family Physicians’ The EveryONE Project®.
E nvironmental policies or best practices to reduce asthma triggers from indoor, 
outdoor, or occupational sources
• CDC’s Health Impact in 5 Years Initiative, which includes Home weatherization assistance programs, 
clean diesel bus fleets, and comprehensive smokefree policies. 
• CDC’s Smoking & Tobacco Use: Secondhand Smoke provides links to fact sheets, reports, infographics, 
and other resources.
• American Lung Association’s Create an Asthma-Friendly Work Environment, which includes information on 
how to help employees with asthma.
• U.S. Department of Energy’s Where to Apply for Weatherization Assistance. 
• The University of California, San Francisco Smoking Cessation Leadership Center’s Destination Tobacco Free: 
A Practical Tool for Hospitals and Health Systems is a toolkit to help health systems create and implement 
smokefree policies. 
• The University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, School of Medicine, Behavioral Health and Wellness 
Program’s Dimensions: Tobacco-free Policy Toolkit is a toolkit to help health systems create and implement 
smokefree policies.
For more information, visit: 
https://www.cdc.gov/asthma/exhale/
11
Appendix 1: Selected Information About 
Education on Asthma Self-Management 
This appendix includes additional selected information about the examples of how healthcare professionals and 
the healthcare team can use the EXHALE strategy Education on asthma self-management.
The information provided in this appendix is organized according to the examples listed earlier in this document:
• Teach patients with asthma, their families, and their caregivers to manage asthma by using a personalized 
action plan. 
• Refer patients with asthma, their families, and their caregivers to existing asthma self-management education 
(AS-ME) programs.
• Receive training and/or become certified in delivering AS-ME.
• Investigate and consider available medical billing codes that can be used for AS-ME.
Example 1: Teach patients with asthma, their families, and their caregivers to manage 
asthma by using a personalized action plan
The following websites have examples of asthma action plans that can be personalized:
• CDC’s Tools for Asthma Control includes printable, electronic, and computer-based asthma action plans.
• American Lung Association’s Create an Asthma Action Plan includes English and Spanish asthma action 
plans.
12
Appendix 1: Selected Information About Education on  
Asthma Self-Management (continued)
Example 2: Refer patients with asthma, their families, and their caregivers to existing 
asthma self-management education (AS-ME) programs
Many health departments have asthma programs that can provide information on existing AS-ME programs;  
for asthma program contact information, visit https://www.cdc.gov/asthma/contacts.
Also, the following table lists some online AS-ME available to patients with asthma, their families, and their 
caregivers:
Examples of Online AS-ME for Patients with Asthma, Their Families, and Their Caregivers
Name (Source)
Intended Audience
Language(s) 
How to Access
Asthma Basics 
(ALA)
School nurses, CHWs, and others who teach adults and 
children with asthma, their families, and caregivers.
English, 
Spanish
Go to website 
(use hyperlink)
Asthma Care for Adults 
(AAFA)
Adults with asthma and their caregivers. 
English, 
Spanish
Go to website 
(use hyperlink)
AAFA, Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America; ALA, American Lung Association; CHW, community health worker.
The information on this page is current as of August 2020. More information on some of these tools and other 
AS-ME tools is available at the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality Technical Brief on AS-ME packages.
13
Appendix 1: Selected Information About Education on  
Asthma Self-Management (continued)
Example 3: Receive training and/or become certified in delivering AS-ME
The National Asthma Educator Certification Board is a voluntary testing program used to assess knowledge in 
asthma education. Certified asthma educators are typically licensed healthcare professionals (such as a nurse 
or a respiratory therapist) who obtain this certification, but others (such as community health workers) can also 
become certified if they have at least 1,000 hours of relevant experience and pass this test.
The following table lists some available resources that can help healthcare professionals and others deliver AS-ME:
Examples of Resources That Can Help Healthcare Professionals and Others Deliver AS-ME
Name (Source)
Intended Audience
Language(s) 
How to Access
Asthma Basics 
(ALA)
School nurses, CHWs, and others who teach adults and 
children with asthma, their families, and caregivers.
English, 
Spanish
Go to website 
(use hyperlink)
Asthma Basics for Children 
(AAFA)
Healthcare professionals who teach parents and 
teachers of young children with asthma.
English, 
Spanish
Go to website
(use hyperlink)
Asthma Education for the 
Community Health Worker 
(AAE)
CHWs who teach people with asthma and their families.
English
Go to website 
(use hyperlink)
Breathe Well, Live Well 
Training for Educators  
(ALA)
Healthcare professionals, health educators, or CHWs 
who teach adults with asthma.
English
See note*
Kickin’ Asthma  
(ALA)
School personnel and others who teach children with 
asthma aged 11–16 years.
English
See note*
Open Airways for Schools 
(ALA)
School personnel and others who teach children with 
asthma aged 8–11 years.
English, 
Spanish
See note*
Wee Breathers  
(AAFA)
Healthcare professionals who teach parents of young 
children with asthma.
English, 
Spanish
Go to website 
(use hyperlink)
You Can Control Asthma 
(AAFA)
Healthcare professionals who teach school-age 
children with asthma and their families.
English, 
Spanish
Go to website 
(use hyperlink)
*Contact the American Lung Association at 1-800-586-4872 to access training and program materials. Kickin’ Asthma and Open Airways 
for Schools are designed to be delivered as group AS-ME. 
AAE, Association of Asthma Educators; AAFA, Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America; ALA, American Lung Association;  
CHW, community health worker.
Notes about this page: 
•
This information is current as of August 2020.
•
More information on some of these tools and other AS-ME tools is available at the Agency for Healthcare Research 
and Quality Technical Brief on AS-ME packages.
14
Appendix 1: Selected Information About Education on  
Asthma Self-Management (continued)
Example 4: Investigate and consider available medical billing codes that can 
be used for AS-ME
The following table lists some medical billing codes that have been used to receive payment for delivering 
AS-ME. Reimbursement for these codes is not guaranteed because health insurance plans (including state 
Medicaid agencies) vary in which codes they reimburse. Some health insurance plans have reimbursed one or 
more of these codes. 
AS-ME: Medical Billing Code Examples 
Code
Brief Description
94664 (CPT)
Demonstration and/or evaluation of patient utilization of an aerosol generator, nebulizer, 
metered dose inhaler, or intermittent positive pressure breathing device.
98960 (CPT)
Education and training for patient self-management.
99401–99404 (CPT)
Preventive medicine counseling (individual).
99411–99412 (CPT)
Preventive medicine counseling (group).
99605–99607 (CPT)
Medication therapy management service(s) provided by a pharmacist.
S9441 (HCPCS)
Asthma education.
CPT, Current Procedural Terminology code.
HCPCS, Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System code.
Documents describing use of medical billing codes for AS-ME have been identified from California and Missouri. 
15
Appendix 2: Selected Information 
About Achievement of Guidelines-Based 
Medical Management  
Quality improvement tools and resources include:
• American Academy of Family Physicians’ METRIC® Module: Asthma.
• American Academy of Pediatrics’ Asthma: Quality Improvement Resources & Tools.
• Elward KS, “Asthma Days: An Approach to Planned Asthma Care,” Family Practice Management (2004).
The following table lists some trainings available to healthcare professionals and others on guidelines-based 
medical management:
Examples of Training Opportunities for Healthcare Professionals 
on Guidelines-Based Medical Management
Name (Source)
Notes
Asthma Educator Institute  
(ALA)
Continuing education credits vary by location.
Asthma Management and Education Online  
(AAFA)
Nurses and respiratory therapists can earn 8.75 contact hours.
Creating Asthma-friendly Environments and 
Promoting Access to Guidelines-based Care for 
Children with Asthma  
(NASN, NEEF)
Nurses can earn 3.0 contact hours.
Environmental Management of Pediatric Asthma: 
Guidelines for Health Care Providers  
(NEEF)
Continuing education credits are not available.
Environmental Triggers of Asthma  
(ATSDR)
Physicians can earn 1.75 continuing education credits; nurses can earn 
1.75 contact hours; health educators can earn 1.5 contact hours.
EQIPP: Asthma  
(AAP)
Physicians can earn 54 continuing education credits; nurses can earn  
54 contact hours.
Physician Asthma Care Education  
(NIH)
Website contains materials to deliver this curriculum to physicians.
Putting It Into Practice: Pediatric Environmental 
Health Training Resource  
(CEHN)
Continuing education credits are not available.
AAFA, Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America; AAP
, ALA, American Lung Association; American Academy 
of Pediatrics; ATSDR, Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; CEHN, Children’s Environmental 
Health Network; EQIPP
, Education in Quality Improvement for Pediatric Practice; NASN, National Association 
of School Nurses; NEEF, National Environmental Education Foundation; NIH, National Institutes of Health.
The information in this table is current as of August 2020. 
