Skip directly to site contentSkip directly to search
Español | Other Languages
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH)
Workplace Safety and Health Topics
NIOSH logo and tagline
Fighting Wildfires
Print
Members of the Wyoming Wildland Firefighter Hotshot Crew monitor burn as it makes its way down a hillside. Image is courtesy of the US Forest Service Technology and Development Program.
Members of the Wyoming Wildland Firefighter Hotshot Crew monitor burn as it makes its way down a hillside. Image is courtesy of the US Forest Service Technology and Development Program.

Every year, millions of acres of land burn across the United States and wildland firefighters (WFFs) are asked to protect our lives, our homes, and our forests. But fires are unpredictable and dangerous. Over 400 on-duty WFF fatalities occurred between 2000-2019, based on data compiled in the NIOSH Wildland Firefighter On-Duty Death Surveillance System from three data sources. 1,2,3  Common hazards faced on the fire line can include burnovers/entrapments, heat-related illnesses and injuries, smoke inhalation, vehicle-related injuries (including aircraft), slips, trips, and falls, and others.4  In addition, due to prolonged intense physical exertion, WFFs are at risk for sudden cardiac deaths and rhabdomyolsis.

NIOSH offers resources for fire departments, firefighters, and partner organizations to prevent on-duty injuries, illnesses, and deaths from hazards and exposures associated with fighting wildfires.

CDC and NIOSH also provide resources for workers and homeowners regarding hazards they encounter when cleaning up after a wildfire.

Wildland Firefighter Exposure and Health Effects Study
Fire Fighter Fatality Investigation and Prevention Program (FFFIPP)
Outdoor Workers Exposed to Wildfire Smoke
Hazards During Cleanup Activities
Health Hazard Evaluations (HHE's)
Publications & Resources
Featured Publication
cover of 2013-158
Wildland Firefighting: Hot Tips to Stay Safe and Healthy!

Wildland Firefighting Related Topics
Carbon Monoxide
Emergency Response Resources
Fire Fighter Directory Page
Heat Stress
Noise and Hearing Loss Prevention
Occupational Heart Disease
Respirators
Stress at Work
Total Worker Health
Traumatic Occupational Injuries
References
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Fire Administration (US). [2017] Fire Fighter Fatalities in the United States. Date accessed: January, 2017.
National Wildfire Coordinating Group, Risk Management Committee. [2017] Safety Gram Archive. Date Accessed January, 2017.
National Fire Protection Association (US). [2017] Fatalities and Injuries. Date accessed: January, 2017.
Britton C, et al., Epidemiology of injuries to wildland firefighters. Am J Emerg Med. 2013 Feb; 31(2):339-45. [Epub 2012 Nov 15].
Top of Page
Last Reviewed: May 10, 2023
Source: National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Syndicate
home
Workplace Safety and Health Topics
Fighting Wildfires
plus icon
Wildland Firefighter Exposure and Health Effects Study (WFFEHE)
Fire Fighter Fatality Investigation and Prevention Program (FFFIPP)
Outdoor Workers Exposed to Wildfire Smoke
Hazards During Cleanup Following Wildfires
Health Hazard Evaluations (HHE’s)
Publications and Resources
Emergency Preparedness and Response Directory
Follow NIOSH
 Facebook
 Pinterest
 Twitter
 YouTube
NIOSH Homepage
NIOSH A-Z
Workplace Safety & Health Topics
Publications and Products
Programs
Contact NIOSH
About CDC
Contact Us
800-232-4636
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
LinkedIn
Youtube
Pinterest
Snapchat
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
Accessibility
External Links
Privacy
Policies
No Fear Act
FOIA
Nondiscrimination
OIG
Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
USA.gov