CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Health Equity and 
Climate Change
2.1 Fundamentals of Health Equity and Climate Change
It is hard to overstate the connections between climate change, health, and equity. The following framework 
(Figure 2.1.1) outlines these critical connections. See Appendices 1 and 2 for other foundational frameworks—
including the Healthy Communities Framework, A Public Health Framework for Reducing Health Inequities, and 
others—that have informed action on climate change, health and equity.
•	
The root causes and upstream drivers of climate change and health inequities are often the same: Our 
energy, transportation, land use, housing, planning, food and agriculture, and socioeconomic systems 
are at once key contributors to climate pollution and key shapers of community living conditions. The 
powerful institutions largely responsible for constructing these systems influence and are influenced by 
social inequities such as class and race.
•	
The health risks and impacts of climate change are not equally or fairly distributed across people, 
communities or nations. The impacts of climate change on health are significantly moderated by 
individual and community vulnerability and resilience. Two critical components of climate vulnerability 
are pre-existing health status and living conditions. In the United States, these factors are shaped by 
economics and the distribution of money, power, social policies and politics at the global, national, state 
and local levels.1 They differ by place, race, and income, as a result of inequities in the distribution 
of money and power, historical disinvestment in some communities, discriminatory practices and 
policies over time, structural racism, higher pollution burdens, and lesser access to resources for health. 
Therefore, low-income communities and communities of color are disproportionately affected by the 
health impacts of climate change. 
•	
Climate change exacerbates existing health and social inequities. Climate change worsens environmental 
conditions (e.g., ozone pollution) associated with chronic illness and injury and causes social and 
economic dislocations that most impact disadvantaged communities.
•	
Interventions that act on upstream shared systemic causes can most effectively address both climate change 
and health inequities.  Interventions to address climate change and health inequities range from upstream 
structural, policies, and systems changes to downstream treatment, rehabilitation, and disaster recovery 
efforts. Interventions along the entire spectrum are needed to protect and promote health in the era of 
climate change. However, upstream solutions have the greatest benefits, providing primary prevention 
and promoting healthy, equitable, sustainable, and resilient communities.7 
•	
Building political and economic power and voice are essential components of climate resilience. Especially 
for historically disenfranchised low-income communities and communities of color, power imbalances 
have allowed the perpetuation of unhealthy living conditions associated with health inequities and 
climate vulnerability. The lack of power and voice constrains the ability of communities to respond to 
climate change impacts and contribute local knowledge to climate solutions. Building community power 
is required to transform systems to foster health.
5
HEALTH EQUITY AND CLIMATE CHANGE
Health Equity: Some Definitions 
Health equity means that everyone has a fair and just opportunity to be as healthy as possible. 
This requires removing obstacles to health such as poverty, discrimination, and their consequences, 
including powerlessness and lack of access to good jobs with fair pay, quality education and 
housing, safe environments, and health care.2
Systems, social and structural inequities, and institutional power impact our environment, living 
conditions, behavior, and how we function as a society. 
•	
Systems3  are a collection of parts—physical structures, people, and organizations—that 
interact to provide an important function. Farms, farmers, packing plants, food inspectors, 
restaurants, and truckers all play a role in our food system. Social and structural inequities and 
powerful institutions interact to shape the systems that determine living conditions, human 
impacts on the climate, other environmental impacts, and health outcomes.
•	
Social and Structural Inequities4 refers to the historical disenfranchisement and unequal 
distributions of power, money, and resources that are often associated with class, race, ethnicity, 
place, immigration status, gender, and sexual orientation. These inequities are perpetuated by 
hierarchies in power through mechanisms rooted in key institutions and processes.5
•	
Institutional Powers6 and authorities (such as corporations, governments, school systems, 
and large NGOs) make decisions that impact the physical environment and shape the societal 
distribution of health-promoting resources and opportunities (e.g. parks, grocery stores, 
education, childcare, medical care, jobs). People in institutions and their decisions and actions 
are influenced by social values and mores that perpetuate inequities. 
Figure 2.1.1: Climate Change and Health
6
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
2.2 Climate Vulnerability and Resilience
Climate Vulnerability 
Climate vulnerability is the degree to which people or communities are at risk of experiencing the negative 
impacts of climate change.14 It is often tightly coupled with health and social inequities. Key components in 
climate vulnerability include exposure, sensitivity to threats, and capacity to adapt and respond.15 See Table 1 for 
more details.
Intergenerational Equity 
“We have been mortgaging the health of 
future generations to realize economic and 
development gains in the present.” 
The Rockefeller Foundation–Lancet 
Commission on Planetary Health
The actions of one generation affect the 
conditions of those that follow; climate 
change makes this more pressing than 
ever. Intergenerational equity means that 
fundamental rights and interests of future 
generations must be treated with equal value 
as the rights and interests of those living 
today. To ensure the survival and well-being 
of future generations we must sustain the 
most basic of earth’s resources—clean water, 
clean air, healthy soil, and climatic stability.
Young people are establishing a legal 
framework for achieving intergenerational 
equity. Juliana v. U.S. is a youth-filed 
constitutional climate lawsuit asserting 
that government actions that cause climate 
change violate the youngest generation’s 
constitutional rights to life, liberty, and 
property, as well as fail to protect essential 
public trust resources. Judges have upheld 
the case against efforts by the Obama and 
Trump Administrations to dismiss it.8,9
Global Climate
Inequities: Responsibility 
and Burden 
The smallest and least developed countries 
often bear the most harmful burden 
of climate change, although they have 
contributed the least to the problem. 
Industrialized nations are responsible for the 
majority of climate pollution. From 1850 to 
2011, the United States, European Union, 
China, Russian Federation, and Japan emitted 
two-thirds of the global CO2 emissions, and 
the United States was responsible for 27% 
of global greenhouse gas emissions (GHGE). 
China has emerged as the world’s largest 
climate polluter. However, the United States 
ranks in eleventh place for per capita GHGE 
at 16.5 metric tons per capita10—more than 
three times the global average. China ranks 
42nd (7.5 metric tons per capita) and India 
ranks 127th (1.7 metric tons per capita).11
The World Health Organization estimates 
that 99% of the disease burden from climate 
change occurs in developing countries, 88% 
of which occurs in children under five.12 From 
January 1980 through July 2013 there were 
2.52 million deaths globally due to climate-
related disasters, 51% of which occurred in 
the 49 least developed countries.13
7
HEALTH EQUITY AND CLIMATE CHANGE
Table 2.2
COMPONENTS OF 
CLIMATE VULNERABILITY
Exposure to climate threats 
•	
Geography and the nature of climate change impact particular locations differently.
	
Low-lying coastal communities are at greater risk of coastal flooding from sea level rise and tidal 
storm surges than communities at higher altitudes.
	
People living in flood plains are at higher risk of flooding with extreme precipitation.
	
Communities on or below steep hillsides are at risk of mudslides/landslides during extreme 
weather events.
	
Those living at the wilderness-urban interface are at higher risk of wildfires.
•	
Occupations can increase exposure to climate risks.
	
Outdoor workers such as agricultural, landscape, and construction workers are at greater risk of 
exposure to extreme heat. 
	
First responders are at increased risk of death or injury during extreme events such as hurricanes 
or wildfires. 
Sensitivity and susceptibility to climate threats
•	
Individual characteristics may increase susceptibility to climate risks. For example, older individuals and 
children have increased susceptibility to heat stress.
•	
Pre-existing health conditions and baseline prevalence of climate-sensitive diseases. (Differences in rates 
of these conditions and diseases often reflect health inequities.)  
	
Those with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are at greater risk of 
respiratory illness from increased ozone, wildfire smoke, and increased pollen. 
	
People with obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and mental illness are more susceptible to 
heat impacts.
	
Immunosuppression increases the risk of climate-related infectious disease.
•	
The baseline status of environmental quality intersects with climate impacts and subsequent health 
outcomes. For example, people living in areas with high baseline levels of air pollution are more 
vulnerable to increased ozone levels due to rising temperatures.
8
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Capacity to adapt to and respond to climate threats 
•	
Differential access to resources, which means that low-income individuals, households, and 
communities are less likely to
	
afford air conditioning to reduce heat risk, or to cope with rising food prices related to climate 
impacts on agriculture;
	
have insurance or financial resources to rebuild or relocate after an extreme weather event; or
	
enjoy the resources required to build infrastructure that promotes climate resilience and 
adaptation. 
•	
Conditions of the built environment, such as
	
aging water and sewage infrastructure that leave some communities more prone to severe 
flooding and potential for water contamination;
	
few trees and parks in some neighborhoods increases risk from heat.
•	
Socially mediated capacity to reduce risk and to prepare and respond effectively. 
•	
Disinvestment in public health and emergency response infrastructure and safety net resources limits 
the capacity for preparedness and response. 
•	
Variable levels of social cohesion which reduces health impacts of climate change and builds social and 
political will to invest in climate action. 
2.3 Race, Ethnicity, and Climate Change
Each of the subsections below have an Appendix with additional information about the effects of 
climate change on the health of the populations discussed (see Appendix 3). 
African Americans
African American communities have lower income, less education, and poorer health status than non-Hispanic 
White communities overall, largely due to the legacy of slavery and historical discriminatory practices in housing, 
education, employment, and healthcare.16 These inequities contribute to greater vulnerability to climate impacts. 
•	
African Americans are more likely to live in neighborhoods with few trees and more heat-trapping 
pavement.17 The rate of heat-related deaths in African Americans is 150–200% greater than that for non-
Hispanic Whites.18 
•	
African Americans have a 36% higher rate of asthma incidents and are 3 times more likely to die or visit 
the emergency room from asthma-related complication than non-Hispanic Whites.19  
•	
One out of five of African American families live in poverty, compared to one out of fifteen White 
families. During an extreme weather event, these households have a smaller cushion against property 
damage or injuries, further complicated by lack of access to medical care and insurance.20 
9
HEALTH EQUITY AND CLIMATE CHANGE
Native Americans and Alaska Natives
Historical policies, such as colonization and genocide, the Indian Removal Act of 1830, and residential schools for 
Native American children have led to present-day social and health inequities in Native American and Alaskan 
Native communities, including loss of traditional lifestyles, persistent poverty, substandard health services, and 
lack of access to electricity, running water, and communication technologies.21,22   
•	
Traditional Native Americans and Alaska Natives (NA/AN) diets and subsistence hunting and fishing are 
at risk due to climate change.23,24   
•	
NA/AN communities lack access to clean, potable drinking water at higher rates than others.25 Warmer 
water temperatures may exacerbate already-high rates of diarrhea-associated hospitalizations for Native 
American and Alaskan Native children.26  
Latinos/Hispanics/Latinx
The three terms “Latinos” “Hispanics” “Latinx” are used here, but in the remainder of the document, “Latinos” 
will be used for ease of use. Latino communities have lower income, less education, and poorer health status 
than non-Hispanic White communities overall, largely due to historical discriminatory practices in housing, 
education, employment, and healthcare.27  
•	
Nearly 1 in 2 Latinos live in counties with poor air quality. Latino children are twice as likely to die from 
asthma as non-Latino whites, and Latino children living in areas with high levels of air pollution have a 
heightened risk of developing Type 2 diabetes.28,29,30     
•	
Over 1.8 million Latinos live within a half-mile radius of oil and gas development.31 
Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders
Historical practices such as colonization and trade, the aggregation of census and health data, and a history of 
military testing have led to present-day social and health inequities that increase climate-related health risks in 
Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander communities.32  
•	
Scientists project that by 2100, Hawai‘i and some Pacific islands will experience about 1ft–2.5ft higher 
sea-level rise when compared to global averages.33 
•	
A higher proportion of Pacific Islanders in the United States live in counties with pollution exceeding the 
federal air quality standards when compared with Asians and other racial groups.34 
	
Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander communities experience high rates of asthma, expected to 
worsen as climate change worsens air quality.35  
10
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
2.4 Community Climate 
Resilience
Climate resilience is “the capacity of a community to 
anticipate, plan for and mitigate the risks­
— and seize 
the opportunities—associated with environmental and 
social change” brought about by climate change.36
Earlier definitions framed resilience as the ability 
to “bounce back” from a stress or shock, possibly to 
unhealthful and inequitable conditions.37 “Bouncing 
back” resilience might allocate resources to maintain 
the status quo or make marginal changes that do not 
fundamentally reduce vulnerabilities across the whole 
of a community. “Bouncing forward” resilience is 
characterized by greater openness and adaptability; 
it strives to see climate change as an opportunity to 
change social, economic, and political structures to 
promote equity and sustainability and to invest in 
systems changes that promote health and well-being.38 
The characteristics of vulnerability and resilience may 
coexist at the same time. For example, a neighborhood 
may be exposed to high levels of air pollution but also 
have a strong local food system and a high-quality 
community clinic. Improving the underlying health 
status and structural and system determinants of 
health is one of the most effective strategies to build 
climate resilience. See examples below of how LHDs 
can advance health equity and build community 
climate resilience. 
2.5 What LHDs Can Do: 
Health Equity and Climate 
Resilience
Building resilience to climate change and addressing social and health inequities requires addressing the systemic 
causes of these challenges through collaboration and shared decision-making with impacted communities, 
community-based organizations, and other stakeholders across sectors. Below is a set of recommended actions 
LHDs can take to advance health equity and climate resilience within their current programs. For additional 
actions by climate impacts and LHD programs and functions see Sections 4, 6, and 7 respectively. For a 
comprehensive review of LHD action to advance health equity see Human Impact Partners Health Equity Guide.40 
 
A climate-resilient 
community:39
•	
Is committed to the transformative 
change required to build a healthy, 
equitable, and sustainable community.
•	
Takes action to build individual and 
collective capacity to respond proactively 
to and influence social, economic, and 
environmental change.
•	
Nurtures diversity, respects the 
experience and knowledge of all 
community members, and proactively 
engages all segments of a community in 
understanding and responding to change.
•	
Is organized in a way that provides 
capacity to recognize and act on problems 
and to learn from experience.
•	
Fosters social cohesion and collaboration 
across networks through bonding, 
bridging, and linking.
•	
Builds community capitals including 
economic, social, built, political, and 
environmental capitals.
•	
Supports investment in physical 
infrastructures and services that meet the 
needs of all residents.
•	
Recognizes the value of environmental 
resources and works to protect, enhance, 
and maintain them.
11
HEALTH EQUITY AND CLIMATE CHANGE
Assessment and Surveillance
•	
Include health and social inequities and vulnerabilities in climate and health vulnerability assessments.
•	
Improve data about vulnerable populations and health and social inequities and use it in planning and 
prioritization for climate and health programming.
	
Acknowledge missing data and data limitations that may limit ability to assess particular 
sub-groups.
•	
Highlight the most striking inequalities in data and publications and the root causes of these inequalities 
to provide clear, consistent, and widespread messages to decision makers, affected communities, partners, 
and the general public about the existence of and need to address health inequities. 
•	
Use community-based participatory research or “citizen science” or “community science” and 
qualitative methods (e.g., surveys, interviews, focus groups) to identify indicators for climate and health 
vulnerability assessments and in data collection and interpretation.
	
Multnomah County Health Department (Oregon) contracted with a community-based 
organization, Coalition of Communities of Color and Portland State University Planning 
Department to create a climate and health tool and interactive map to inform LHD action and 
guide future jurisdiction investments. Community members were instrumental in selecting 
indicators included in the tool. See Section 7.1—Surveillance.
Intersectoral Collaboration
•	
Build awareness of the connection between the social determinants of health, and the shared systems 
that create inequities and contribute to climate change with partner government agencies and elected 
officials. Advance a narrative that emphasizes the climate change, health, and equity nexus and the 
solutions that confer climate, health, and equity benefits.
•	
In collaboration with other agencies, include equity in assessments, research, and policy and program 
decisions to examine the climate, health, and equity impacts of proposed policies, projects, and programs.
•	
In collaboration with other jurisdiction agencies and intersectoral partners advance policies and 
programs that address the underlying determinants of health and inequities in access to resources and 
infrastructure.
	
Promote urban agriculture and local food systems (e.g. community gardens).
	
Prioritize infrastructure investments to improve climate resilience and heath equity in historically 
neglected communities (e.g. active transportation infrastructure, public parks and green space).
•	
Include climate, health, and equity language and data in jurisdiction plans, budgets, and assessments.
	
As part of the city’s 2018 One New York Plan, the NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene 
worked collaboratively with other city agencies to include public health and health equity in the 
city’s planning up until 2040, including for the city’s transportation and food systems.41 
•	
Work across sectors to agree upon common language related to climate change, health, and equity. See 
Section 7.3—Collaboration.
12
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Community Engagement and Education
•	
Conduct a scan to assess potential interest in the issue of climate change, health, and equity including 
both current and potentially new partners.
•	
Conduct outreach to local Environmental Justice (EJ) groups, Community-based Organizations (CBOs), 
and community leaders to begin conversations regarding their interest and activities related to climate 
change, health, and equity.
	
Los Angeles County Department of Public Health contracted with a local EJ organization, 
Communities for a Better Environment, to conduct a workshop to gather community input 
on LADPH’s extreme heat response plan. Community recommendations will be compiled and 
included in the response plan.
•	
Make an effort to meet potential CBO or community partners where they are and to develop an 
understanding of their current priorities, concerns and challenges, membership and constituency, 
strengths and resources, and level of interest in climate change and health equity. 
•	
See Section 7.2—Engagement and Section 8—Communications. 
	
The New Orleans Health Department partnered with Gulf Coast Center for Law & Policy to 
host community meetings to assess knowledge of the city’s extreme weather response protocol, 
communicate impacts of climate change on health, identify community health service needs, and 
cultivate trust while prioritizing community action steps that address the intersection of climate 
and health.
•	
Recognize and acknowledge the inherent power dynamics between community members and government 
employees, people of color and White people, and people with different educational and socioeconomic 
backgrounds. Provide space and processes, such as agreed on ground rules for meetings and 
opportunities for one-on-one conversations, to address those dynamics. 
•	
Identify strategies to build community capacity as you partner with CBOs and community members
and leaders.
•	
Include community members in decision-making processes regarding LHD programs and investments.
•	
Establish fair and supportive mechanisms for participation when requesting CBO or community member 
participation in meetings or other partnership activities.
•	
Collaborate with CBOs and community members and leaders to develop culturally and linguistically 
appropriate materials for public information and dissemination and use an array of channels to ensure 
information reaches all members of the community.
