PREPARING FOR 
 
THE REGIONAL HEALTH IMPACTS OF 
 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IN THE UNITED STATES 
A summary of health effects, resources, and adaptation examples from  
health departments funded by CDC’s Climate and Health Program 
July 2020 / Climate and Health Program 
2
Contents
Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Background
3
Regions
6
Alaska
7
Hawaii and U.S.-Affiliated Pacific Islands
10
Midwest 
13
Northeast
16
Northern Great Plains 
20
Northwest
22
Southeast 
25
Southern Great Plains 
28
Southwest
30
U.S. Caribbean 
33
Conclusion
36
Selected Links and Resources
36
Appendix: Explanation of Graphics for Accessibility
36
3
Executive Summary
Each region of the United States experiences climate change 
and its impacts on health differently, due to the regions’ 
location-specific climate exposures and unique societal and 
demographic characteristics. The Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC) Climate and Health Program supports 
states, counties, cities, tribes, and territories to assess how 
climate change will affect their community, identify vulnerable 
populations, and implement adaptation and preparedness 
strategies to reduce the health effects of climate change. This 
document describes the various health impacts climate change 
will have on different regions of the United States as outlined in 
the Fourth National Climate Assessment (NCA4), actions taken 
by the CDC Climate and Health Program’s health department 
partners to prepare for and respond to climate change in their 
communities, and relevant tools and resources.
Background
Climate change, together with other natural and human-
made health stressors, influences human health and disease 
in numerous ways. Some existing health threats will intensify 
and new health threats will emerge (https://www.cdc.gov/
climateandhealth/effects/default.htm). For example, changes 
in temperature and precipitation are increasing health risks 
associated with wildfire and ground-level ozone pollution. 
Rising air and water temperatures and more intense extreme 
events are expected to shift exposure to waterborne and 
foodborne diseases, affecting food and water safety. With 
continued warming, cold-related deaths are projected to 
decrease and heat-related deaths are projected to increase, and 
in most regions, increases in heat-related deaths are expected 
to outpace reductions in cold-related deaths. The frequency 
and severity of allergic illnesses, including hay fever, are 
expected to increase as a result of shorter winters and earlier 
and longer pollen seasons. Climate change is also projected to 
alter the geographic range and distribution of insects and pests, 
potentially exposing more people to ticks and mosquitoes 
that carry the agents that cause diseases like Lyme disease, 
Zika, West Nile and dengue. Communities in the Southeast, for 
example, are particularly vulnerable to the combined health 
impacts from heat and flooding, which can result in large 
populations of nuisance mosquitoes and potential disease risk. 
Finally, extreme weather and climate-related events can have 
lasting mental health consequences in affected communities, 
particularly if they result in degradation of livelihoods or 
community relocation. For more information on the health 
impacts of climate change in the United states, see the health 
chapter of the fourth National Climate Assessment: https://
nca2018.globalchange.gov.
Impact of Climate Change on Human Health 
Climate change impacts a wide range of health outcomes. This image illustrates some of the most significant components of climate 
change (rising temperatures, more extreme weather, rising sea levels, and increasing carbon dioxide levels), their effect on exposures, 
and the subsequent health outcomes that can result from these changes in exposures. Source: https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/
effects/default.htm. For accessibility see appendix, page 36.  
  
  
 
R
I
S
I
N
G
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
M
O
R
E
 
E
X
T
R
E
M
E
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
R
I
S
I
N
G
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 I
N
C
R
E
A
S
I
N
G
  
  
 
T
E
M
P
E
R
A
T
U
R
E
S
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
W
E
A
T
H
E
R
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
S
E
A
 
L
E
V
E
L
S
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
C
O
₂
 
L
E
V
E
L
S
4
Importantly, not everyone is equally at risk. The impacts on 
health due to climate change are both place-specific and 
path-dependent, meaning the impacts of climate change 
depend on where you are and who you are, as there are 
varying degrees of climate exposure and differences in 
individual and societal characteristics that can either protect 
you or make you more vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change. For example, populations including older adults, 
children, low-income communities, and some communities 
of color are often disproportionately affected by, and less 
resilient to, the health impacts of climate change. Adaptation 
and mitigation policies and programs help individuals, 
communities, and states prepare for the risks of a changing 
climate and reduce the number of injuries, illnesses, and 
deaths from climate-related health outcomes.
CDC’s Climate and Health Program is the national leader in 
empowering communities to protect human health from a 
changing climate. Beginning in 2010, the Climate and Health 
Program implemented the Climate-Ready States and Cities 
Initiative (CRSCI) to help state and city health departments 
prepare for and respond to the health effects that a changing 
climate may bring to their communities. Sixteen states and 
two cities are funded to implement the five-step Building 
Resilience Against Climate Effects (BRACE) framework to identify 
likely climate impacts in their communities, potential health 
effects associated with these impacts, and their most at-risk 
populations and locations so that they can then develop and 
implement health adaptation plans and address gaps in critical 
public health functions and services. For more information see: 
https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/climate_ready.htm
Five sequential steps comprise the BRACE framework
The Building Resilience Against Climate Effects (BRACE) framework is a five-step process that allows health officials to develop 
strategies and programs to help communities prepare for the health effects of climate change.  Accessibility source: https://www.cdc.
gov/climateandhealth/BRACE.htm 
Step 1: Anticipate Climate Impacts and Assessing Vulnerabilities
Identify the scope of climate impacts, associated potential health outcomes, and populations and locations 
vulnerable to these health impacts.
Step 2: Project the Disease Burden
Estimate or quantify the additional burden of health outcomes associated with climate change.
Step 3: Assess Public Health Interventions
Identify the most suitable health interventions for the identified health impacts of greatest concern.
Step 4: Develop and Implement a Climate and Health Adaptation Plan
Develop a written adaptation plan that is regularly updated. Disseminate and oversee implementation of the plan.
Step 5: Evaluate Impact and Improve Quality of Activities
Evaluate the process. Determine the value of information attained and activities undertaken.
5
The Climate and Health Program also supports tribes, territories, 
and other communities that are not part of the Climate-Ready 
States and Cities Initiative (CRSCI) through the “Building 
Capacity of the Public Health System to Improve Population 
Health through National, Nonprofit Organizations” program 
managed by CDC’s Center for State, Tribal, Local and Territorial 
Support (CSTLTS). Funded partners include the National 
Indian Health Board (NIHB) Climate-Ready Tribes Initiative; the 
Association of State and Territorial Health Officials (ASTHO) 
Climate-Ready Territories Initiative; the Council for State and 
Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE); the National Environmental 
Health Association (NEHA); and the National Association of 
County and City Health Officials (NACCHO).
Jurisdictions funded or previously funded by the  
CDC Climate and Health Program
This map highlights the states, cities, counties, tribes, and territories that have received funding and technical assistance 
from the CDC Climate and Health Program directly and through partnerships with other organizations. For accessibility see 
appendix, page 36. 
Lummi Nation
Clackamas 
County
Greenville 
Ranchera
San Francisco
Alameda County
San Mateo County
Kaw 
Nation
WA
OR
CA
AZ
FL
NC
IL
WI
MI
MD
RI
MA
NH
NY
ME
VT
MN
New Orleans
New York City
Boston
Seneca 
Nation
of Indians
Marquette 
County
Village of 
Wainwright
Sitka Tribe 
of Alaska
U.S. 
Virgin 
Islands
Pala 
Band of
Mission 
Indians
Federated States
of Micronesia
Commonwealth
of the Northern
Mariana Islands
Blackfeet Nation
Winnebago 
Tribe of 
Nebraska
Swinomish
Indian Tribal 
Community
6
Regions
Outlined on the following pages are the unique climate-related health impacts for each region of the United States  
(as defined by the Fourth National Climate Assessment) and relevant highlights of actions taken by the CDC Climate and 
Health Program’s health department partners to prepare for and respond to climate change in their communities. The 
climate impacts described in each region are not comprehensive, as additional threats may exist that were not included 
in the Fourth National Climate Assessment. This document synthesizes the impacts that are directly health-relevant, but 
is not meant to be all-encompassing. In addition, the descriptions of local adaptation activities are not comprehensive. 
A variety of climate-relevant health adaptation activities that are not funded by CDC are taking place across the country, 
and are not reflected in this document. 
ALASKA
HAWAII  
and  
U.S.-AFFILIATED  
PACIFIC ISLANDS
U.S. CARIBBEAN
SOUTHWEST
NORTHERN 
GREAT PLAINS
NORTHWEST
SOUTHERN 
GREAT PLAINS
MIDWEST
NORTHEAST
SOUTHEAST
7
ALASKA
8
Health Impacts 
Temperature-Related Death  
and Illness
Winter travel has long been a key feature of 
subsistence food gathering activities for rural Alaska 
communities. Higher winter temperatures and shorter durations 
of ice seasons may delay or disrupt usual patterns of ice 
formation on rivers, lakes, and the ocean. For hunters and other 
travelers, this increases the risk of falling through the ice, having 
unplanned trip extensions, or attempting dangerous routes, 
leading to exposure injury, deaths, or drowning (NCA4 Alaska 
Chapter, Key message (KM) 3, Direct Exposures).
Air Quality Impacts
Climate-driven increases in air pollution in Alaska 
are primarily linked to the increases in wildfire 
frequency and intensity. Wildfires threaten individual safety in 
adjacent communities and pose risks downwind from smoke 
inhalation, particularly for children and persons with chronic 
respiratory and cardiovascular conditions. Air conditioning in 
homes is rare in Alaska, so relief is seldom available for at-risk 
persons to escape smoke exposure due to wildfires, assuming 
proper filters are not installed. It is also likely that there will be 
an increased risk of respiratory allergies related to longer and 
more intense seasonal pollen blooms and mold counts. 
Increased respiratory symptoms have also been reported in 
communities that are experiencing increased windblown dust 
(NCA4 Alaska Chapter, KM3, Direct Exposures). 
Extreme Events
Extreme weather events such as major storms, 
floods, and heavy rain events have all occurred in 
Alaska with resulting threats to human health. For coastal areas, 
the damage from late-fall or winter storms is likely to be 
compounded by a lack of sea ice cover, high tides, and rising sea 
levels, which can increase structural damage to tank farms, 
homes, and buildings and can threaten loss of life from 
flooding. Similar events threaten communities on rivers, where 
flooding due to increased glacial melt or heavy rains can cause 
extensive structural damage and loss of life (NCA4 Alaska 
Chapter, KM3, Direct Exposures).
Vector-Borne Diseases
Changes in insect and arthropod ranges due to 
climate change have raised human health concerns, 
such as the documented increase in venomous insect stings in 
Alaska. Tick-borne human illnesses are uncommon in Alaska, 
but new reports of ticks on domestic dogs without travel 
exposure outside Alaska raise concerns about tick range 
extension into Alaska and the potential for introduction of new 
pathogens (NCA4 Alaska Chapter, KM3, Indirect Effects).
Water-Related Illness
Climate-related environmental changes that can 
affect access to water and sanitation services have 
been well-documented. These changes include loss of surface 
water through drainage of tundra ponds, lower source-water 
quality through increased riverbank erosion due to permafrost 
thaw or saltwater intrusion in coastal communities, and 
increased coastal erosion or storm surge leading to wastewater 
treatment system damage. Permafrost thawing poses a threat 
to centralized water and wastewater distribution systems that 
need stable foundations to maintain system integrity. Likewise, 
the documented northward range expansion of beavers has 
been postulated to increase the threat of waterborne Giardia 
infections in humans; however, human Giardia illness reports 
have been stable in Alaska and show no increasing regional 
trends (NCA4 Alaska Chapter, KM3, Indirect Effects). 
Food Safety, Nutrition  
and Distribution
In Alaska, disruption of ice cellars from thawing 
permafrost and coastal erosion has raised concerns about food 
spoilage or infectious outbreaks, but documented human 
illness events are lacking. Additionally, harmful algal blooms 
(HABs) produce toxins that can harm wildlife and pose a health 
risk to humans through consumption of contaminated shellfish. 
Because phytoplankton growth is increased in part by higher 
water temperatures, risks for HAB-related illnesses, including 
paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP), may increase with climate 
change. PSP is a long-recognized, untreatable, and potentially 
fatal illness caused by a potent neurotoxin in shellfish (NCA4 
Alaska Chapter, KM3, Indirect Effects).
Mental Health and Well-Being
Climate change is a common concern among 
Alaskans and is associated with feelings of 
depression and uncertainty about the potential changes to 
communities, subsistence foods, culture, and traditional 
knowledge and the potential of relocation from long-
established traditional sites. These uncertainties and threats 
have effects on mental health and on family and community 
relationships and may lead to unhealthy responses such as 
substance abuse and self-harm (NCA4 Alaska Chapter, KM3, 
Psychological and Social Effects).
Populations of Concern
The Alaskans most vulnerable to these climate-
related changes are those who are most 
dependent on subsistence foods, the poor, the very young, 
the elderly, and those with existing health conditions that 
require ongoing care, that limit mobility, or that reduce 
capacity to accommodate changes in diet, family support, or 
stress (NCA4 Alaska Chapter, KM3, Psychological and Social 
Effects). Native American and Alaska Native communities are 
particularly vulnerable as the health risks of climate change 
9
are expected to compound existing health issues, in part due 
to the loss of traditional foods and practices, the mental stress 
from permanent community displacement, increased injuries 
from lack of permafrost, storm damage and flooding, smoke 
inhalation, damage to water and sanitation systems, decreased 
food security, and new infectious diseases. 
CDC-Funded Jurisdictions 
Village of Wainwright, NIHB Mini-Grant, funded in  
2017-2018
The Tribal Village of Wainwright identified that the effects 
of climatic changes on sea ice are of particular concern to 
community members. In response, a project was implemented 
that augmented existing accident prevention and rescue 
programs through the promotion of the use of location 
technology (inReach devices) and developed new community-
based programs that increase knowledge of health risks due 
to climate change to reduce morbidity and mortality due to 
subsistence and travel activities.
Sitka Tribe of Alaska, NIHB Mini-Grant, funded in  
2019-2020
The Sitka Tribe of Alaska relies heavily on shellfish and 
seafood for nutrition and cultural purposes. Warming water 
temperatures threatened the safety of shellfish for human 
consumption. The Tribe is coordinating a regional project to 
monitor shellfish contamination.
10
HAWAII and U.S.-AFFILIATED 
PACIFIC ISLANDS
11
Health Impacts 
Extreme Events
The rate of global average sea level rise has 
accelerated and has become very damaging in 
the region. Impacts include coastal erosion, episodic flooding, 
permanent inundation, heightened exposure to marine hazards, 
and saltwater intrusion to surface water and groundwater 
systems. Already apparent on many shorelines, these problems 
endanger human communities by negatively impacting basic 
societal needs, such as food and freshwater availability, housing, 
energy and transportation infrastructure, and access to 
government services. Climate-related migration in U.S.-affiliated 
island also directly impacts health (NCA4 Hawai’i & 
U.S.-Affiliated Pacific Island Chapter, KM3).
Vector-Borne Diseases
An increase in the incidence of vector-borne 
diseases such as malaria and dengue in the Pacific 
Islands has been linked to climate variability and is expected 
to increase further as a result of climate change. For example, 
in late 2013 and early 2014, Fiji experienced the largest 
outbreak of dengue in its history, with approximately 28,000 
reported cases (NCA4 Hawai’i & U.S.-Affiliated Pacific Island 
Chapter, KM6).
Water-Related Illness
Dependable and safe water supplies for Pacific island 
communities and ecosystems are threatened by 
rising temperatures, changing rainfall patterns, sea level rise, 
and increased risk of extreme drought and flooding. Islands are 
already experiencing saltwater contamination due to sea level 
rise, which is expected to catastrophically impact food and 
water security, especially on low-lying atolls. Additionally, 
chronic water shortages are possible as rainfall decreases and 
both evaporation and the water requirements of a growing 
human population increase (NCA4 Hawai’i & U.S.-Affiliated 
Pacific Island Chapter, KM1). 
Food Safety, Nutrition  
and Distribution
Away from urban areas, many island communities 
rely on food gathered from the ocean and land. Rising sea 
surface temperatures are shifting the location of fisheries. 
Ocean warming and acidification, coupled with damaging 
watershed and reef practices, converge on island shores to 
increasingly limit the food resources that can be gathered from 
the sea (NCA4 Hawai’i & U.S.-Affiliated Pacific Island Chapter, 
KM3). In Hawaii, climate change impacts, such as reduced 
streamflow, sea level rise, saltwater intrusion, and long periods 
of drought, threaten the ongoing cultivation of taro and other 
traditional. These kinds of climate impacts lead to an increased 
dependence on imported food that is of little nutritional value. 
This is a public health concern for Hawaii and the USAPI, as 
Indigenous Pacific Islanders have the highest rates of obesity 
and chronic diseases, such as diabetes, in the region (NCA4 
Hawai’i & U.S.-Affiliated Pacific Island Chapter, KM5).
Mental Health and Well-Being
Sea level rise imperils Indigenous communities of 
the Pacific. The sea that surrounds Pacific island 
communities continues to rise at a rate faster than the global 
average, with documented impacts on agriculture, coastal 
infrastructure, food security, livelihoods, and disaster 
management in the Republic of Palau and the Republic of the 
Marshall Islands. In Hawaii, sea level rise impacts on traditional 
and customary practices (including fishpond maintenance, 
cultivation of salt, and gathering from the nearshore fisheries) 
have been observed. Detachment from traditional lands has a 
negative effect on the spiritual and mental health of the people 
(NCA4 Hawai’i & U.S.-Affiliated Pacific Island Chapter, KM5).
Populations of Concern
Indigenous communities of the Pacific have an 
inseparable connection to and derive their sense 
of identity from the lands, territories, and resources of their 
islands. Climate change threatens this familial relationship 
with ancestral resources and is disrupting the continuity that 
is required for the health and well-being of these communities 
(this experience is common to many tribal and Indigenous 
communities across the United States). Women have also been 
identified as a more vulnerable population to regional climate 
risks due to the role they have in terms of economic activities, 
safety, health, and their livelihoods (NCA4 Hawai’i & U.S.-
Affiliated Pacific Island Chapter, KM5). 
12
CDC-Funded Jurisdictions 
 
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands  
Commonwealth Healthcare Corporation, ASTHO grant,  
funded in 2017-2018
To bolster capacity to address the public health threats 
associated with climate change, the Commonwealth of the 
Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI) Commonwealth Health 
Care Corporation planned and executed a climate change 
training for staff throughout the agency. This helped to build 
knowledge and expertise locally. In addition, the project team 
also developed a CNMI-specific health impact scoping report 
to assess the local risk of various impacts. Throughout the 
project, the team also identified and built relationships with key 
partners outside of public health, including other governmental 
agencies, who can provide expertise and input on climate and 
health work across CNMI.
The Federated States of Micronesia  
Department of Health and Social Affairs, ASTHO grant, funded in 
2017-2018
This project aimed to assist the people of the low-lying islands 
in the states of Chuuk and Pohnpei in the Federated States of 
Micronesia with knowledge, skills and techniques to maintain 
a healthy island diet in a changing environment. The project 
consisted of educational workshops and hands-on exercises. 
In this collaborative project, local agricultural and diet-related 
knowledge and practices were paired with outside technical 
assistance (geographic information system training provided by 
CDC and ASTHO) to empower the communities on the low-lying 
islands to adapt to climate change with regard to food security 
and water management
13
MIDWEST 
14
Health Impacts 
Temperature-Related Death  
and Illness
Increased daytime and nighttime temperatures are 
associated with heat-related diseases (for example, dehydration 
and heatstroke) and death in the Midwest. High rates of 
heat-related illness also have been observed in rural 
populations, where occupational exposure to heat and access to 
care is a concern. Compared to other regions where worsening 
heat is also expected to occur, the Midwest is projected to have 
the largest increase in extreme temperature-related premature 
deaths under the higher scenario (RCP8.5). Northern 
midwestern communities and vulnerable populations that 
historically have not experienced high temperatures may be at 
risk for heat-related disease and death. Risk of death from 
extremely cold temperatures will decrease under most climate 
projection scenarios (NCA4 Midwest Chapter, KM4, 
Temperature).
Air Quality Impacts
Increases in ground-level ozone and particulate 
matter are associated with the prevalence of 
various lung and cardiovascular diseases, which can lead to 
missed school days, hospitalization, and premature death. In the 
absence of mitigation, ground-level ozone concentrations are 
projected to increase across most of the Midwest, resulting in an 
additional 200 to 550 premature deaths in the region per year 
by 2050. People, particularly children, with asthma and other 
respiratory diseases are especially vulnerable to aeroallergens. 
Aeroallergens can cause allergic rhinitis and exacerbate asthma 
and sinusitis (NCA4 Midwest Chapter, KM4, Air Quality). 
Additionally, flooded buildings can experience mold growth 
that can also trigger asthma attacks and allergies during 
cleanup efforts (NCA4 Midwest Chapter, KM4, Precipitation). 
Extreme Events
ERiver flooding in large rivers like the Mississippi, 
Ohio, and Missouri Rivers and their tributaries 
can flood surface streets and low-lying areas, resulting in 
drinking water contamination, evacuations, damage to 
buildings, injury, and death (NCA4 Midwest Chapter, KM4, 
Precipitation). Projected increases in the number of extreme 
precipitation events have been linked to an increased risk of 
traffic crashes (NCA4 Midwest Chapter, KM5).
Vector-Borne Diseases
Climate-related changes in habitats for disease-
carrying insects like the mosquito found in the 
Midwest (Culex pipiens and Culex tarsalis) that transmits West 
Nile virus (WNV) and the blacklegged, or deer tick (Ixodes 
scapularis) that transmits Lyme disease have been associated 
with higher rates of infection. Overall warmer temperatures are 
linked to increased numbers of deer ticks in the upper Midwest 
which has led to earlier seasonal exposure and longer season of 
risk. Northern expansion of the Culex species in the Midwest is 
expected to result in upwards of 450 additional WNV cases 
above the 1995 baseline by 2090 absent greenhouse gas 
mitigation (NCA4 Midwest Chapter, KM4, Habitat Conditions).
Water-Related Illness
Precipitation events can transport pathogens that 
cause gastrointestinal illnesses, putting populations 
who rely on untreated groundwater (such as wells) at an 
increased risk of disease, particularly following large rainfall 
events (NCA4 Midwest Chapter, KM4, Precipitation). Contact 
with and consumption of water contaminated with 
cyanobacteria (from harmful algal blooms, for example) have 
been associated with skin and eye irritation, respiratory illness, 
gastrointestinal illness, and liver and kidney damage (NCA4 
Midwest Chapter, KM4, Habitat Conditions). In metropolitan 
areas with older sewer systems that combine sanitary sewage 
with storm water, extreme rain can result in the release of raw 
sewage into rivers and streams, posing both health risks and 
challenges to major sources of drinking water including the 
Mississippi River and the Great Lakes (NCA4 Midwest Chapter, 
KM5).
Mental Health and Well-Being
Mental stress following flooding events can cause 
substantial health impacts, including 
sleeplessness, anxiety, depression, and post-traumatic stress 
disorder. Similarly, drought has been identified as a slow-
moving stressor that contributes to acute and chronic mental 
health impacts such as anxiety and depression (NCA4 Midwest 
Chapter, KM4, Precipitation).
Populations of Concern
The health risks of climate change are especially 
high for people who are less able to cope 
because characteristics like age, income, or 
social connectivity make them more vulnerable (NCA4 Midwest 
Chapter, KM4). For those who are chronically ill or reliant on 
electronic medical devices, the increased cost of electricity, 
which contributes to energy insecurity, may introduce 
financial and health burdens (NCA4 Midwest Chapter, KM4, 
Temperature). Tribes in the Midwest have been among the first 
to feel the effects of climate change as it impacts their culture, 
sovereignty, health, economies, and ways of life (NCA4 Midwest 
Chapter, KM6, Tribal Adaptation).
CDC-Funded Jurisdictions 
Minnesota Department of Health, CRSCI Recipient and NEHA 
Mini-Grant recipient, funded by CDC since 2010
The Minnesota Climate and Health Program protects public 
health by engaging, informing, and guiding health and climate 
champions throughout the state to create healthy, equitable, 
and resilient communities. The program works with partners 
and stakeholders to educate about the health impacts of 
15
a changing climate through trainings and communication 
materials. For example, the program released a seven-part 
training and companion materials to educate on climate and 
health in Minnesota, including agriculture and food security, 
air quality, extreme heat, water changes, well-being, and 
vector-borne diseases. To help planners and decision-makers in 
emergency management understand regional climate trends, 
the program co-developed climate and health data profiles 
in 2019. The profiles are tailored to each of the six Homeland 
Security and Emergency Management (HSEM) regions across 
the state, acting as a framework for discussing projected local 
risks related to our changing climate and supporting the 
development of climate adaptation strategies that protect 
community health and safety.
Minnesota also received a mini-grant in 2019 from CDC and the 
National Environmental Health Association (NEHA) to develop 
an online climate and health vulnerability assessment tool to 
allow communities across the state to visualize and analyze 
health, climate, and environmental data to aid planning and 
adaptation.
Michigan Department of Health and Human Services, 
CRSCI Recipient, funded by CDC since 2010
The Michigan Climate and Health Adaptation Program (MICHAP) 
primarily addresses extreme heat, air quality and respiratory 
illnesses, flooding, vector-borne diseases, water-borne diseases, 
extreme weather events, and power outages from such events. 
Some of MICHAP’s adaptation activities include integrating 
climate health adaptation in community planning and the 
built environment, building adaptive capacity in urban and 
rural communities based on their specific vulnerabilities, and 
working with other local and state level public health partners 
to collect, assess, and share climate and health information 
and data. Addressing these hazards serves and benefits all the 
Michigan residents, and especially the vulnerable populations 
in each locale where work is being done. An important climate 
driver of negative health outcomes in Michigan is extreme 
precipitation. Major health impact pathways identified through 
the BRACE framework include exposure to waterborne diseases 
from combined sewer overflows, harmful algal blooms due 
to increased runoff, impacts on drinking water sources from 
flooding and drought, and injury or stress from flooding-related 
damage to homes and infrastructure.  MICHAP partners across 
sectors to address many of these issues. 
University of Illinois at Chicago School of Public Health 
and Illinois Department of Public Health, CRSCI Recipient, 
funded by CDC since 2012.
The BRACE-Illinois Program is preparing for the impacts of 
a changing climate by focusing on extreme heat, air quality 
and respiratory illnesses, flooding, vector-borne diseases, 
water-borne diseases, and mental health. The program’s 
main activities to address these hazards are education, 
capacity building in the local health departments, and use 
of planning tools. Through a competitive selection process, 
local health departments have the opportunity to receive 
training and support in the areas of climate science, public 
health effects linked to climate sensitive events, public health 
hazard vulnerability assessment, strategic planning to address 
prioritized climate sensitive health effects, and incorporating 
climate change into current programs and planning processes. 
The program also provides educational opportunities by 
providing continuing medical education credits to a variety 
of audiences through multiple modalities with an emphasis 
on the medical community (an identified key stakeholder). 
BRACE-Illinois also develops toolkits designed to help guide 
public health and emergency preparedness professionals in 
their efforts to prepare their communities for the new normal of 
extreme weather events.
Wisconsin Division of Public Health, CRSCI Recipient, funded 
by CDC since 2012
The Wisconsin Climate and Health Program addresses health 
effects related to extreme heat, extreme cold, flooding, and 
vector-borne diseases. The program is advised by a health 
equity advisory team so that implementation and evaluation 
efforts can be focused on those most at-risk. One of the 
adaptation activities has been a prospective extreme heat-
related community assessment of public health emergency 
response (CASPER) in Milwaukee, which a previous heat 
vulnerability index project identified as extremely vulnerable 
during an extreme heat event. This tool is being evaluated for 
use during extreme weather events. The data being collected 
will be used to inform future extreme heat plans in Milwaukee. 
The program has also worked on a flood vulnerability and a risk 
map. An interactive ArcGIS online web platform was created to 
assess vulnerability to and risk for flooding based on a variety 
of variables including a social vulnerability index, flood plains, 
and critical health care infrastructure. Additionally, a flood 
resilience scorecard is being produced through the program.  
This scorecard is a comprehensive checklist that assesses 
social, institutional, and environmental variables so that local 
municipalities can better assess their vulnerabilities to flooding 
events. It also allows local municipalities to better plan for 
future flooding events by using the tool’s recommendations 
based on their individual scores.
Marquette County Health Department, Michigan, NACCHO 
Mini-Grant, funded in 2019.
In addition to collaborating with the CDC-funded Michigan 
Climate and Health Adaptation Program (MICHAP), Marquette 
County also received a mini-grant from CDC and the National 
Association of County and City Health Officials (NACCHO) in 
2019 to support local adaptation efforts. The Marquette County 
Health Department developed a “Public Health Response 
to Flooding Disasters” plan to protect their population from 
increasing extreme rain events. Local decision makers are using 
the resource to assess climate impacts on their communities’ 
health and using built environment design concepts to 
incorporate health adaptations into community planning.
16
NORTHEAST
17
Health Impacts 
Temperature-Related Death  
and Illness
During extreme heat events, nighttime temperatures 
in the region’s big cities are generally several degrees higher 
than surrounding regions, leading to higher risk of heat-related 
death. In urban areas, the hottest days in the Northeast are also 
often associated with high concentrations of urban air 
pollutants including ground-level ozone (NCA4 Northeast 
Chapter, KM3, Climate-Infrastructure Interaction and 
Heightened Risks).
Extreme Events
Much of the historical development of industry 
and commerce in New England occurred along 
rivers, canals, coasts, and other bodies of water, these areas 
often have a higher density of contaminated sites, waste 
management facilities, and petroleum storage facilities that are 
potentially vulnerable to flooding. As a result, increases in flood 
frequency or severity could increase the spread of contaminants 
into soils and waterways, resulting in increased risks to human 
health (NCA4 Northeast Chapter, Background). When coupled 
with storm surges, sea level rise can pose severe risks of 
flooding, with consequent physical and mental health impacts 
on coastal populations (NCA4 Northeast Chapter, KM2, Sea 
Level Rise, Storms, and Flooding).
Water-Related Illness
Increased soil erosion and agricultural runoff—
including manure, fertilizer, and pesticides—are 
linked to excess nutrient loading of water bodies as well as 
possible food safety or public health issues from food and 
waterborne infections. Warmer winters are expected to increase 
pressure from weeds and pests, demand for pesticides, and 
therefore the risk of human health effects from increased 
chemical exposures (NCA4 Northeast Chapter, KM 1, Intense 
Precipitation). 
Food Safety, Nutrition  
and Distribution
Increased soil erosion and agricultural runoff—
including manure, fertilizer, and pesticides—are linked to 
excess nutrient loading of water bodies as well as possible food 
safety or public health issues from food and waterborne 
infections. Warmer winters are expected to increase pressure 
from weeds and pests, demand for pesticides, and therefore the 
risk of human health effects from increased chemical exposures 
(NCA4 Northeast Chapter, KM 1, Intense Precipitation). 
Increasing prevalence of shell disease in lobsters and several 
pathogens in oysters have been associated with rising water 
temperatures; other pathogens that infect shellfish pose risks to 
human health (NCA4 Northeast Chapter, KM2, Ocean Warming). 
Mental Health and Well-Being
When coupled with storm surges, sea level rise 
can pose severe risks of flooding, with 
consequent physical and mental health impacts on coastal 
populations (NCA4 Northeast Chapter, KM2, Sea Level Rise, 
Storms, and Flooding).
Populations of Concern
Older or sicker individuals and those persons 
who are without access to air conditioning, 
living in older homes, socially isolated, or working outdoors are 
considered particularly vulnerable to the effects of heat (NCA4 
Northeast Chapter, KM4, Health Effects of Extreme Heat). The 
combination of heat stress and poor urban air quality can pose a 
major health risk to vulnerable groups: young children, elderly, 
socially or linguistically isolated, economically disadvantaged, 
and those with preexisting health conditions, including 
asthma. Similarly, poor, elderly, historically marginalized, recent 
immigrants, and linguistically or socially isolated individuals as 
well as those populations with existing health disparities are 
more vulnerable to precipitation events and flooding due to a 
limited ability to prepare for and cope with such events (NCA4 
Northeast Chapter, KM3, Climate-Infrastructure Interaction and 
Heightened Risks). 
CDC-Funded Jurisdictions 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services, CRSCI 
Recipient, funded by CDC since 2010
Extreme heat, extreme cold, and vector-borne diseases are 
the primary hazards addressed through Maine’s program. 
The program has developed school and community-based 
educational interventions and delivered them to high risk age 
groups. The program has also worked to develop extreme-
weather response plans for state and local agencies. A large 
focus of work has been on vector-borne disease and ticks as 
a changing climate is expected to impact the migration of 
insects. Lyme disease has been increasing the last eight years in 
Maine, and Lyme disease is reported in every county in Maine. 
Maine’s program has developed a real-time data dashboard 
to track cases of tick borne disease, such as Lyme disease, and 
tick-related emergency department visits. The data collected 
through this surveillance helps health officials understand 
the spread of ticks and how a changing climate affects the 
tick’s lifecycle. The surveillance also supports and helps create 
educational campaigns regarding Lyme disease. The program 
is also working with the University of Maine Climate Change 
Institute to develop fine-scale climate models specific to Maine.  
The models predict disease rates which, in turn, can provide 
data for local response planning.
18
Massachusetts Department of Health, CRSCI Recipient, 
funded by CDC since 2010
The Massachusetts Department of Public Health (MDPH) 
Bureau of Environmental Health (BEH) has assisted local 
and state partners in preparing for the health impact of 
climate change, with a focus on inland flooding, heat, air 
quality, sea level rise, and extreme weather events. MDPH/
BEH activities include a previous needs assessment of local 
health departments, development of a Climate Vulnerability 
Mapping Tool, risk-based assessment of climate related 
impacts (e.g., asthma, waterborne disease), identification 
of intervention and adaptation strategies, and evaluation 
of local climate and health action strategies using a Health 
Impact Assessment (HIA) framework. The MDPH program 
also leverages the BEH Environmental Public Health Tracking 
Network, utilizing the Massachusetts portal as a gateway for 
providing regionally relevant resources for evaluating health 
outcomes, environmental exposures, and vulnerability to 
climate change impacts at the community level. MDPH also 
works collaboratively with state agency partners to assess 
climate hazards and recommend specific adaptation strategies. 
For example, the 2018 State Hazard Mitigation and Climate 
Adaptation Program Report, combines the state’s FEMA 
Hazard Assessment with climate data to inform adaptation 
recommendations for local climate change planning.  
New York City Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene, CRSCI Recipient, funded by CDC since 2010
The New York City Climate and Health Program (NYC CHP) 
focuses on the health impacts of current and future climate-
related hazards, primarily, extreme heat, extreme cold, and 
power outages. The program relies on several approaches to 
analyze the magnitude of these impacts and which populations 
and communities are most at risk to these impacts, develop, 
promote, or evaluate climate resilient policies and interventions, 
and communicate climate-health risk messages. In addition, 
the program works to ensure that health is a consideration 
in larger, multi-sectoral planning or resiliency initiatives. The 
program does this by helping to prioritize local communities for 
climate mitigation and adaption investments. One example of 
this is the NYC Heat Vulnerability Index, developed by NYC CHP 
and Columbia University, which provides an understanding of 
how the risk for dying during a heat emergency varies across 
neighborhoods. To achieve program success, the program relies 
heavily on partnerships with internal sister agency programs 
including, the Air Quality Program, the Environmental Public 
Health Tracking Program, Healthy Homes, Office of Emergency 
Preparedness and Response, and the Center for Health Equity. 
New York State Department of Health, CRSCI Recipient, 
funded by CDC since 2010
New York State (NYS) has primarily focused on the health 
impacts of heat, as well as flooding and heavy precipitation 
events. These climate hazards are being addressed through 
the development and implementation of adaptation activities 
in coordination with program partners. These adaptations 
include development of Heat and Health profile reports that 
summarize extreme heat exposure, sensitivity, vulnerability, 
and adaptive capacity for NYS counties, and working with the 
National Weather Service to revise the thresholds for issuing 
heat advisories in NYS. A partnership with the NYS Office of 
Temporary and Disability Assistance increases utilization of their 
program to provide air conditioners to vulnerable populations. 
Staff also worked with the NYS Environmental Public Health 
Tracking Program to create a mapping application to display 
cooling center locations across the state and track heat stress 
hospitalization and emergency department visits annually, and 
published in peer-reviewed public health journals on lessons 
learned from the response to Hurricane Sandy. The program 
also partners with the NYS Department of Environmental 
Conservation Climate Smart Communities (CSC) program, which 
helps local governments take action to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions and adapt to a changing climate. 
Maryland Department of Health, CRSCI Recipient, funded by 
CDC since 2012
The Maryland Climate Change Health Adaptation Program is 
the lead for integration of health adaptation into the state’s 
response to a changing climate. Located in the Maryland 
Department of Health, the program provides a health focus 
to climate response efforts across the state, through technical 
assistance, development of epidemiologic tools and data 
products, and education and outreach. The program primarily 
addresses extreme heat, air quality and respiratory illness, 
water-borne diseases, and extreme weather events, such 
as hurricanes and tornadoes. The program, which is closely 
integrated with the Maryland Commission on Climate Change, 
includes education and outreach for school age youth (K-12), 
minority groups, community health workers, and informal 
healthcare networks. Among the products of the program is 
a climate change training curriculum for community health 
workers and extension workers. The training increases 
competency among informal healthcare networks in order 
to advise patients and community members on how to 
understand climate impact on themselves and their health. 
The program’s Climate Ambassador program, which is a 
program targeted at school age youth in Maryland, provides 
students with tools and information to educate and empower 
themselves and their communities to respond to the impacts of 
a changing climate.
New Hampshire Division of Public Health Services,  
CRSCI Recipient, funded by CDC since 2012
The New Hampshire Climate and Health Program works to 
build community resilience to threats such as extreme heat 
and injury, flooding and injury, tick habitat, and vector-borne 
disease. The program serves the public via a focus on target 
populations, including the elderly, lower-income communities, 
and individuals spending time outdoors. The program funds 
partners for two multi-year interventions to address 1) severe 
weather and home emergency preparedness among older 
adults in a river valley, and 2) expanding insect seasons, tick 
exposure, and tick-safe practices among outdoor counselor 
and campers in the Seacoast region. A heat-safety flyer was 
created for the elderly population to warn about hot weather 
and provide suggestions on how to stay cool, hydrated, and 
19
informed. One of the program’s internal agency adaptation 
activities is updating a state-level extreme heat response plan. 
Another internal adaptation activity is to fund the testing of 
shellfish in warming waters to reduce the risk of food-borne 
disease. The Climate and Health Program has collaborated with 
the Environmental Public Health Tracking Program to post 
information for heat injuries on an interactive data portal.
Rhode Island Department of Health, CRSCI Recipient, 
funded by CDC since 2012
The Rhode Island Climate Change and Health Program primarily 
addresses community resilience, extreme heat, air quality 
and respiratory illnesses, flooding, sea level rise, and vector-
borne diseases.  Vulnerable populations such as seniors, youth, 
outdoor workers, and residents in the urban core are the focus 
of the program’s work. The program’s main adaptation activities 
include extreme heat messaging to outdoor workers, Lyme 
disease outreach to local communities, and climate resiliency 
in the urban core communities. Strategic plans for both 
vector-borne disease and extreme heat have been developed.  
Communications campaigns have also been used to spread 
awareness and provide guidance on personal protection against 
Lyme disease and other tick-borne illnesses, and extreme heat. 
The program has developed a climate change and health guide 
for Rhode Island residents in English, Spanish, and Portuguese. 
A focus of the program has been on community resiliency 
and supporting Rhode Island Health Equity Zones to adapt to 
climate change. The Health Equity Zones have focused their 
work on emergency preparedness and neighborhood flooding. 
The Senior Resiliency project focused on preparing long-term 
care and assisted living senior housing for possible climate-
related health effects.  The project conducted resiliency audits 
and developed plans for emergency situations. A facility self-
assessment tool was also developed to allow individual facilities 
to evaluate their resiliency and emergency preparedness.
Vermont Department of Health, CRSCI Recipient and NEHA 
mini-grant recipient, funded by CDC since 2012
The Vermont Climate and Health Program addresses key 
climate-related health risks in Vermont including heat illnesses, 
poor air quality and allergenic pollen, vector-borne diseases, 
water-borne diseases, cyanobacteria, mental health impacts, 
and extreme weather events, such as flooding and storms. 
While all Vermonters are at risk for climate-related health 
impacts, the program focuses on mitigating health impacts 
for especially high-risk populations including older adults, low 
income households, and residents with pre-existing health 
conditions. Some of the program’s main adaptation activities 
include increasing hot weather preparedness, promoting home 
weatherization, and providing energy-saving shade trees. Many 
of the program’s activities help to provide health co-benefits 
as part of statewide climate mitigation efforts focused on the 
transportation, housing, forestry, and energy sectors.
Vermont also received an additional grant from the National 
Environmental Health Association (NEHA) focused on Health 
in All Policies (HiAP). This grant will be used to implement 
two new HiAP strategies: 1) Integrate heat-related climate, 
health, vulnerability, and adaptive capacity data into Vermont’s 
Environmental Public Health Tracking Data Explorer. These data 
will be used to raise awareness about heat risks and inequities, 
communicate with the public about adaptation resources, and 
identify gaps in adaptive capacity. 2) Implement accountability 
structures for hot weather preparedness and response through 
a “Hot Weather Workgroup” of multi-sectoral partners, including 
representatives from emergency management, hospital 
preparedness, human services, senior services, education, 
occupational safety, and regional planning agencies.
Boston Public Health Commission, NACCHO mini-grant 
recipient, funded in 2019
The Boston Public Health Commission developed heat 
awareness materials and translated them into ten languages 
to assist a wide range of communities across the city. These 
products are designed as communication tools to reach 
particularly at-risk populations, to reduce health impacts during 
heat waves.
Seneca Nation of Indians, NIHB Mini-Grant, funded in 2020
The Seneca Nation of Indians (located in what is now called 
New York) is working to address impacts from flooding and 
storm water, including prevention of vector-borne disease, by 
incorporating health into existing collaborative climate work. 
The mini-grant project focuses on health communication.
Collaborating to Protect Health: 
Extreme Heat in the Northeast
CDC-funded state health departments in Rhode Island, 
Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont partnered with 
the National Weather Service to form a Northeast 
Regional Heat Collaborative (NERHC). This multiagency 
partnership led to increased understanding of heat-
related hospitalizations and deaths and successfully 
changing the NWS Heat Advisory Policy for all of New 
England to better improve health outcomes. The 
Regional Collaborative pooled data across New England 
in order to better represent the association between the 
impacts of heat on hospitalizations and deaths and help 
inform public health policy.
20
NORTHERN  
GREAT PLAINS 
21
Health Impacts 
Air Quality Impacts
Major dust activity in the United States is 
centered in the Great Plains, extending from 
Montana to southern Texas, where sources are mainly from 
human activities associated with land use, such as agriculture. 
These are also regions where climate change is expected to 
affect drought patterns (CHA 2016, 4. Extreme Events, 4.5 
Droughts, Wind Erosion and Dust Storms Box). 
Extreme Events
Over the last two decades, tribes have 
experienced unusually catastrophic fires, floods, 
and droughts that are already straining response capacities, and 
climate change is expected to increase the need for the ability 
to fight fires, floods, and droughts. This has widespread impacts 
on tribal economies and livelihoods, domestic and municipal 
water supplies, and health and well-being (NCA4 Northern 
Great Plains Chapter, KM5).
Vector-Borne Diseases
In the northern Great Plains—a hotspot for West 
Nile Virus (WNV) activity—increased precipitation 
has been shown to lead to higher Cx. tarsalis abundance a few 
weeks later. The locations of annual WNV outbreaks vary, but 
several states have reported consistently high rates of disease 
over the years, including North Dakota and South Dakota (CHA 
2016, 5. Vector-Borne Diseases, 5.3 West Nile Virus, Observed 
Impacts and Indicators, Impacts of Climate and Weather). 
Food Safety, Nutrition  
and Distribution
The Northern Great Plains region plays an 
important role in U.S. food security, and agriculture has been 
integral to the history and development of the region (NCA4 
Northern Great Plains Chapter, KM2). The probability for more 
very hot days (days with maximum temperatures above 90°F) is 
expected to increase, with potential impacts on agriculture 
(NCA4 Northern Great Plains Chapter, KM1). Additionally, 
indigenous peoples in the region are observing many climate 
and seasonality changes to their natural environment and 
ecosystems, many of which are impacting livelihoods as well as 
traditional subsistence and wild foods, wildlife, plants and water 
for ceremonies and medicines, and health and well-being 
(NCA4 Northern Great Plains Chapter, KM5).
Populations of Concern
Because Tribes are among those in the region with 
the highest rates of poverty and unemployment, 
and because many are still directly reliant on natural resources, 
they are among the most at risk to climate change (NCA4 
Northern Great Plains Chapter, KM5). Additionally, pregnant 
women and newborns are uniquely vulnerable to flood health 
hazards. Flood exposure was associated with adverse birth 
outcomes (preterm birth, low birth weight) after the 1997 floods 
in North Dakota, connected to maternal experience of traumatic 
stress. (CHA 2016, 4. Extreme Events, 4.4 Flooding Related to 
Extreme Precipitation, Hurricanes, and Coastal Storms) 
CDC-Funded Jurisdictions 
Blackfeet Nation, NIHB Mini-Grant, funded in 2017-2018
The Blackfeet Nation (located in what is now called Montana) 
project produced a Blackfeet Community Climate Health 
Guide that addresses climate impacts and develops activities 
for engaging tribal community members and leaders in best 
practices for addressing climate-related health impacts. This 
collaborative process was community-driven and responsive to 
local climate and health needs.
Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska, NIHB Mini-Grant, funded  
in 2020
The Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska is implementing a climate 
and health communication strategy to inform community 
members, including specific outreach to farmers. The mini-
grant project will involve local stakeholders and address the 
unique climate and health needs of this rural community, 
which may include impacts on agriculture and effects of 
flooding and drought.
22
NORTHWEST
23
Health Impacts 
Temperature-Related Death  
and Illness
While the Northwest is not typically considered a 
high-risk area for heat-related illness, heat waves (defined as 
5-day, 1-in-10-year events) across the country are projected to 
increase in frequency and intensity. In the Northwest, nighttime 
heat waves (defined as 3-day, 1-in-100-year events) have a 
greater influence on human health than daytime heat waves and 
have increased in frequency since 1901. These changes are 
projected to make heat-related illness more common in the 
future (NCA4 Northwest Chapter, KM5, Future Climate Change 
Relevant to Regional Risks). In particular, agricultural workers are 
at increased risks for heat-related injuries because they work 
outside during the summer harvest season (NCA4 Northwest 
Chapter, KM4, Linkage Between Climate Change and Regional 
Risks).
Air Quality Impacts
More frequent wildfires and poor air quality are 
expected to increase respiratory illnesses in the 
decades to come (NCA4 Northwest Chapter, KM4, Future 
Climate Change Relevant to Regional Risks). Wildfire smoke can 
be severe, particularly in communities in the eastern Northwest. 
Smoke events during 2004–2009 were associated with a 7.2% 
increase in respiratory hospital admissions among adults over 
65 in the western United States. In Boise, Idaho, 7 of the last 10 
years have included smoke levels considered “unhealthy for 
sensitive groups” (including children) for at least a week during 
the fire season, causing some cancellation of school-related 
sports activities (NCA4 Northwest Chapter, KM4, Linkage 
Between Climate Change and Regional Risks). Additionally, 
projected increases in ground-level ozone (smog), small 
particulate matter (PM2.5), and airborne allergens can further 
complicate respiratory conditions. (NCA4 Northwest Chapter, 
KM4, Future Climate Change Relevant to Regional Risks).
Vector-Borne Diseases
In the last several years, the region has seen an 
increase in some infectious diseases. A potential 
increase in Lyme disease cases in some states is associated with 
rising temperatures and changing tick habitat. The Washington 
Department of Health’s vector surveillance program has 
observed an earlier onset of West Nile virus-carrying 
mosquitoes, likely associated with higher temperatures, and an 
increasing number of human infections, with some resulting in 
fatalities. Before 1999, Cryptococcus gatti infections were 
limited to the tropics, but Cryptococcus gatti is now established 
in Northwest soil, with 76 cases occurring in Oregon in 2015 
(NCA4 Northwest Chapter, KM4, Linkage Between Climate 
Change and Regional Risks).
Water-Related Illness
Future extreme precipitation events could increase 
the risk of exposure to water-related illnesses as the 
runoff introduces contaminants and pathogens (such as 
Cryptosporidium, Giardia, and viruses) into drinking water 
(NCA4 Northwest Chapter, KM4, Future Climate Change 
Relevant to Regional Risks). The Oregon Health Authority 
recorded spikes in cases of Salmonella and E. coli during months 
with extreme heat in 2015. A large outbreak of Shigellosis (a 
bacterial diarrheal disease) occurred in late 2015, affecting a 
large number of homeless people in the Portland Metro region; 
this outbreak was associated with unusually extreme 
precipitation (NCA4 Northwest Chapter, KM4, Linkage Between 
Climate Change and Regional Risks). 
Food Safety, Nutrition  
and Distribution
Climate change is projected to impact First Foods, or 
foods that tribes have historically cultivated for subsistence, 
economic, and ceremonial purposes (NCA4 Northwest Chapter, 
KM2, Linkage Between Observed Climate and Regional Risks). 
The cultural practice of harvesting and consuming First Foods is 
integral to Tribes (NCA4 Northwest Chapter, KM2, Challenges, 
Opportunities, and Success Stories for Reducing Risk). The loss or 
decline of First Foods is projected to have cascading physical and 
mental health impacts for Tribes (NCA4 Northwest Chapter, KM2, 
Emerging Issues). Changes in drought conditions and increased 
water temperatures have increased the potential for freshwater 
harmful algal blooms in recreational waters. Toxins from marine 
harmful algal blooms can accumulate in shellfish, leading to 
illnesses for those who eat them (NCA4 Northwest Chapter, KM4, 
Linkage Between Climate Change and Regional Risks).
Mental Health and Well-Being
Climate-driven hardships can also affect mental 
health, resulting in outcomes ranging from stress 
to suicide. Oregon, Washington, and Idaho all rank among the 
top 10 states in terms of prevalence of mental illness and lowest 
access to mental health care (NCA4 Northwest Chapter, KM4, 
Future Climate Change Relevant to Regional Risks). 
Children and youth, in general, will likely experience cumulative 
mental health effects of climate change over their lifetimes 
(NCA4 Northwest Chapter, KM4, Linkage Between Climate 
Change and Regional Risks).
The cultural practice of harvesting and consuming First Foods is 
integral to tribes and Indigenous health (NCA4 Northwest 
Chapter, KM2, Challenges, Opportunities, and Success Stories 
for Reducing Risk). First Foods are foods that tribes have 
historically cultivated for subsistence, economic, and ceremonial 
purposes (NCA4 Northwest Chapter, KM2, Linkage Between 
Observed Climate and Regional Risks). The loss or decline of 
24
First Foods is projected to have cascading physical and mental 
health impacts for tribes and Indigenous peoples (NCA4 
Northwest Chapter, KM2, Emerging Issues). 
Populations of Concern
Tribes, farmworkers, and low-income 
populations in urban and rural environments are 
three sets of frontline communities (those communities likely 
to experience climate impacts first and worst) in this region 
(NCA4 Northwest Chapter, KM5, Linkage Between Observed 
Climate and Regional Risks).
CDC-Funded Jurisdictions 
Oregon Health Authority, CRSCI Recipient, funded by  
CDC since 2010
The Oregon Climate and Health Program addresses the health 
effects of climate change by focusing on developing cross-
sectoral partnerships and promoting systems and policy 
changes that build resilience across a broad range of climate 
impacts, including extreme heat, extreme cold, wildfire, 
air quality and respiratory illnesses, flooding, sea level rise, 
vector-borne diseases, water-borne disease, mental health, 
drought, harmful algal blooms, and extreme weather events, 
such and hurricanes and tornadoes. This work primarily serves 
local and tribal health departments, partner state agencies, 
community health workers, and other state public health 
programs, including emergency preparedness, chronic disease 
prevention, and acute and communicable disease. Some of 
the program’s activities include developing the public health 
workforce, informing statewide climate policy and planning, 
and supporting partners in building social resilience. The 
Oregon Public Health Division (OPHD) has trained public health 
practitioners, health care providers, emergency response 
personnel, community health workers, partner state agencies, 
and the general public through workshops, trainings, and 
materials development. The focus of these training and 
education efforts has been on the health impacts of climate 
change, health equity, and strategies for reducing health 
impacts and building resilience. The OPHD has provided 
funding, training, and technical assistance to five local health 
jurisdictions to understand and prioritize the health effects of 
a changing climate in their communities and to develop and 
implement strategies for building resilience.
Swinomish Indian Tribal Community, NIHB Mini-Grant, 
funded in 2017-2018
The Swinomish Indian Tribal Community (located in what is 
now called Washington State) created the “Swinomish climate 
change health impact assessment and action plan” by tailoring 
CDC’s BRACE framework using Swinomish-specific health values, 
definitions, and priorities. Extensive community input and 
“values-driven” data informed the plan. They documented and 
shared the process with other Tribes (i.e., through educational 
materials) so that they may be better informed to move forward 
with their impact assessment and action plans.
Clackamas County Public Health, Oregon, NEHA Mini-Grant, 
funded in 2019
Clackamas County Public Health partnered with multiple 
neighboring counties (Multnomah County Health Department 
and Washington County Public Health) to form a regional 
collaborate. They developed a comprehensive climate change 
and health impact assessment report and an accompanying 
data visualization tool for the Portland metropolitan region. 
The project involved engagement of stakeholders to ensure 
inclusion of local needs.
Washington State Department of Health, ASTHO, CSTE, 
and NEHA Mini-Grants, funded in 2019-2020
With a 2019 mini-grant from CDC and the Council of State and 
Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE), Washington state assessed 
climate and respiratory health issues. They developed best 
practice guidance on wildfire communications outreach and 
tested the utility of low-cost air quality sensors during wildfires. 
Washington State also received an additional grant from CDC in 
partnership with the Association of State and Territorial Health 
Officials (ASTHO) in 2019 to aid development of regional climate 
and health profiles and climate-related risk communication 
efforts. This project allowed for localized input to address 
specific needs in regions throughout the state.
Washington State also received an additional grant in 2020 from 
CDC and the National Environmental Health Association (NEHA) 
focused on Health in All Policies (HiAP), which will help support 
local partners in identifying climate-sensitive health risks and 
generate resilience strategies that could inform local planning 
decisions, including county comprehensive management plans. 
In particular, Washington State plans to provide mini-grants to 
local health agencies and nonprofit community organizations, 
as well as host a workshop with local agencies, community 
organizations, and academic partners to share mini-grant 
learnings and generate next steps to increase consideration of 
climate change, health, and equity in local planning. 
Lummi Nation, NIHB Mini-Grant, funded in 2019-2020
The Lummi Nation (located in what is now called Washington 
State) is developing plans to protect their community from 
harmful algal blooms and toxins in shellfish that are influenced 
by warming waters. This included communication activities and 
assessment of local community needs.
25
SOUTHEAST 
26
Health Impacts 
Temperature-Related Death  
and Illness
Cities across the Southeast are experiencing more 
and longer summer heat waves. Sixty-one percent of major 
Southeast cities are exhibiting some aspects of worsening heat 
waves, which is a higher percentage than any other region of 
the country (NCA4 Southeast Chapter, KM1, Increasing Heat).
Air Quality Impacts
In the Southeast, poor air quality can result from 
emissions (mostly from vehicles and power 
plants), wildfires, and airborne allergens. The major urban 
centers in the Southeast are already impacted by poor air 
quality during warmer months. The Southeast has more days 
with stagnant air masses than other regions of the country (40% 
of summer days) and higher levels of fine (small) particulate 
matter (PM2.5), which cause heart and lung disease. The fast 
growth rate of urban areas in the Southeast also contributes to 
aeroallergens, which are known to cause and exacerbate 
respiratory diseases such as asthma. Urban areas have higher 
concentrations of CO2, which causes allergenic plants, such as 
ragweed, to grow faster and produce more pollen allergen than 
in rural areas (NCA4 Southeast Chapter, KM1, Air Quality and 
Human Health). 
Extreme Events
An assessment by the Florida Department of 
Health determined that 590,000 people in South 
Florida face “extreme” or “high” risk from sea level rise, with 
125,000 people living in these areas identified as socially 
vulnerable and 55,000 classified as medically. In addition to 
causing direct injury, storm surge and related flooding can 
impact transportation infrastructure by blocking or flooding 
roads and affecting access to healthcare facilities (NCA4 
Southeast Chapter, KM2, Sea Level Rise Is Contributing to 
Increased Coastal Flooding in the Southeast).
Vector-Borne Diseases
The Southeast is the region of the country with the 
most favorable conditions for the Aedes aegypti 
mosquito and thus faces the greatest threat from diseases 
the mosquito carries. Summer increases in dengue cases are 
expected across every state in the Southeast (NCA4 Southeast 
Chapter, KM1, Vector-Borne Disease). Warmer conditions may 
have facilitated expansion of the geographic range of mosquito 
populations and could potentially increase their capacity 
to transmit Zika virus. Zika virus can cause a wide range of 
symptoms, including fever, rash, and headaches, as well as 
birth defects (NCA4 Health Chapter, Box 14.2: Transboundary 
Transmission of Infectious Diseases).
Populations of Concern
Workers in the agriculture, forestry, hunting, and 
fishing sectors together with construction and 
support, waste, and remediation services work are the most 
highly vulnerable to heat-related deaths in the United States, 
representing almost 68% of heat-related deaths nationally. 
Six of the ten states with the highest occupational heat-
related deaths in these sectors are in the Southeast region, 
accounting for 28.6% of occupational heat-related deaths 
between 2000 and 2010 (NCA4 Southeast Chapter, KM4, Heat, 
Health, and Livelihoods).
CDC-Funded Jurisdictions 
North Carolina Department of Health and Human 
Services, CRSCI recipient, funded by CDC since 2010
The North Carolina Climate and Health Program primarily 
focuses on health effects related to extreme heat and wildland 
fire smoke. The work aims to serve elementary school students, 
farmworkers, local public health preparedness and emergency 
management staff, low income earners, older adults requiring 
nutritional support, and young adults attending county parks. 
To address smoke from wildland fires, a health curriculum for 
elementary students was designed to teach them about smoke 
and health, to be taught in connection with Smokey the Bear in 
Hoke County. Additionally, an implementation and monitoring 
strategy was created to plan for health impacts of wildland fires 
and to provide health education on the topic. A main focus of 
the North Carolina Climate and Health Program has also been 
on heat. The program has conducted statewide heat-related 
illness emergency department visit syndromic surveillance. Heat 
health alert systems were implemented in Bladen, Robeson, 
Sampson, and Scotland counties. Education campaigns were 
also conducted in these four counties and were personalized by 
county to target each county’s at-risk population. The campaigns 
focused on agricultural workers, low income people, mobile 
home residents, the elderly, and the youth.
Florida Department of Health, CRSCI recipient, funded by 
CDC since 2012
The Florida Building Resilience Against Climate Effects 
(FLBRACE) Program is working to improve the ability of the 
public health sector to respond to the health effects of climate 
variability by incorporating the best available science into 
routine public health practice. The primary hazards addressed 
by FLBRACE include extreme heat, wildland fires, flooding, 
water-borne diseases, and extreme weather events, such as 
hurricanes and tornados. Primary health outcomes include 
allergies, asthma, heat-related illness and death, injury, mental 
health disorders, stress-related disorders, and stroke. FLBRACE 
primarily assists community health departments, especially 
27
those serving vulnerable populations, such as the elderly or 
residents living in coastal communities. FLBRACE has developed 
a series of climate and health profiles that identify and describe 
key risk factors and health impacts anticipated in Florida. 
Among these is a study of the health effects of tropical storms 
and hurricanes in Florida using emergency department data, 
birth records, carbon monoxide poisoning data, and food-borne 
and water-borne reports. The program has also developed a 
series of touchstone event summaries that highlight exceptional 
weather events and related health outcomes in Florida.
City of New Orleans Department of Health,  
NACCHO mini-grant, funded in 2020
New Orleans will develop a heat monitoring pilot program, 
through which thermometers and heat sensors will be 
distributed in the community to gather temperature data in 
partnership with a local community organization, with the 
eventual goal of developing a better outreach campaign about 
extreme heat and heat-related illness. The project will focus on 
improving messaging and health for at-risk populations.
28
SOUTHERN  
GREAT PLAINS 
29
Health Impacts 
Temperature-Related Death  
and Illness
Warmer temperatures will likely lead to an increase 
in heat stress, especially during the summertime (NCA4 
Southern Great Plains Chapter, KM2). Notably, heat stress is 
strongly correlated with complications of lung disease, such as 
asthma and emphysema, as well as dehydration and injurious 
electrolyte abnormalities (NCA4 Southern Great Plains Chapter, 
KM4).
Air Quality Impacts
Major dust activity in the United States is 
centered in the Southwest, where sources are 
mostly natural, and the Great Plains, extending from Montana 
to southern Texas, where sources are mainly from human 
activities associated with land use, such as agriculture. Exposure 
to dust can cause respiratory and cardiovascular health 
problems. These are also regions where climate change is 
expected to affect drought patterns (Climate and Health 
Assessment  2016, 4. Extreme Events, 4.5 Droughts, Wind 
Erosion and Dust Storms Box). 
Extreme Events
Extreme weather events with resultant physical 
injury and population displacement are a threat 
to this region. These threats are likely to increase in frequency 
and distribution and are likely to create significant economic 
burdens. (NCA4 Southern Great Plains Chapter, KM3) For 
example, widespread flooding during Hurricane Harvey affected 
dozens of communities, including those in the Houston and 
Beaumont metropolitan areas. Immediate effects included 
deaths from drowning and trauma that claimed the lives of at 
least 63 individuals. Additionally, more than 30,000 people were 
evacuated. Displacement of patients from their communities 
and healthcare providers led to interruptions in medical 
treatment (NCA4 Southern Great Plains Chapter, Box 23.1: 
Hurricane Harvey).
Vector-Borne Diseases
In the Southern Great Plains, hantavirus, Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever, leptospirosis, and West Nile 
virus are all currently endemic and could be impacted by 
climate change. Tropical diseases, such as dengue virus, 
chikungunya virus, and Zika virus are transmitted by Aedes 
mosquitoes, which are currently expanding their geographic 
range in the southern United States (NCA4 Southern Great 
Plains Chapter, KM4).
Water-Related Illness
As water evaporates during periods of drought, the 
remaining water can have higher concentrations of 
chemicals and solid particles, lower dissolved oxygen levels, and 
a higher density of pathogens that cause infectious diseases. 
Drought conditions reduce the number of sources and overall 
quantity of water available to both human and animal users. 
Because these users are sharing a reduced supply, germ 
transmission and outbreaks of infectious disease become more 
likely. Waterborne diseases that have been linked to drought 
include amoebiasis, hepatitis A, salmonellosis, schistosomiasis, 
shigellosis, typhoid and paratyphoid fevers, infection with E. 
coli, cholera, and leptospirosis (NCA4 Southern Great Plains 
Chapter, KM4). 
Food Safety, Nutrition  
and Distribution
Increases in CO2 are changing the nutritional 
composition of food crops. Elevated CO2 levels have been 
shown to reduce the protein composition of grains, tubers, rice, 
wheat, and barley. Micronutrient contents are also affected by 
rising CO2 levels, with atmospheric CO2 concentrations of 550 
parts per million being associated with reductions in zinc, iron, 
phosphorus, potassium, calcium, sulfur, magnesium, copper, 
and manganese across a wide range of crops (NCA4 Southern 
Great Plains Chapter, KM4).
Populations of Concern
Extreme temperatures and aridity pose health 
risks to outdoor agricultural workers (NCA 
Southern Great Plains Chapter, KM4). Tribal and Indigenous 
communities are particularly vulnerable to climate change 
due to water resource constraints, extreme weather events, 
higher temperature, and other likely public health issues (NCA4 
Southern Great Plains Chapter, KM5). 
CDC-Funded Jurisdictions 
Kaw Nation, NIHB Mini-Grant, funded in 2019
The Kaw Nation (located in what is now called Oklahoma) 
received a one-time mini-grant from CDC and the National 
Indian Health Board (NIHB) in 2019 for a project focused on 
local community education and outreach related to climate 
and health. They created fact sheets and other communications 
materials to help inform community members of potential 
climate-related threats and steps to protect health. A major 
focus was the health impacts of heat.
30
SOUTHWEST
31
Health Impacts 
Temperature-Related Death  
and Illness
Under continued climate change, projected 
increases in hot days and extreme heat events in the Southwest 
will increase the risk of heat-associated deaths. Under the 
higher scenario (RCP8.5), the Southwest would experience the 
highest increase in annual premature deaths due to extreme 
heat in the country, with an estimated 850 additional deaths 
per year by 2050. Under a lower scenario (RCP4.5), deaths 
would be reduced by half compared to the higher scenario 
(RCP8.5). By 2090, deaths and economic losses would more 
than double from 2050 under all emissions scenarios. Heat and 
other environmental exposures particularly affect outdoor 
workers (NCA4 Southwest Chapter, KM7).
Air Quality Impacts
Other environmental conditions of greatest 
concern for human health are ground-level ozone 
air pollution, dust storms, particulate air pollution (such as from 
wildfires and dust storms), and aeroallergens (airborne proteins 
that trigger allergic reactions). The risk of onset or exacerbation 
of respiratory and cardiovascular disease is associated with a 
single or a combined exposure to ground-level ozone pollution, 
particulate air pollution, and respiratory allergens. These 
conditions may also lead to new cases or exacerbation of allergy 
and asthma (NCA4 Southwest Chapter, KM7). Drier conditions 
can also increase reproduction of a fungus found in soils, 
potentially leading to the disease coccidioidomycosis, or Valley 
fever (NCA4 Health Chapter, Box 14.1: Health Impacts of 
Drought and Periods of Unusually Dry Months).
Vector-Borne Diseases
Infectious diseases like plague and hantavirus 
pulmonary syndrome disproportionately affect the 
Southwest region. Heat extremes, warming, changes in 
precipitation, and potentially an intensified El Niño-Southern 
Oscillation may influence the distribution and occurrence of 
vector-borne diseases like West Nile virus and may lead to the 
emergence of new disease (NCA4 Southwest Chapter, KM7).
Water-Related Illness
Prolonged droughts can affect drinking water 
availability, reduce water quality, and send  
more people seeking medical treatment (NCA4 Southwest 
Chapter, KM7). 
Food Safety, Nutrition  
and Distribution
Food production in the Southwest is vulnerable to 
water shortages. Increased drought, heat waves, and 
reduction of winter chill hours can harm crops and livestock; 
exacerbate competition for water among agriculture, energy 
generation, and municipal uses; and increase future food 
insecurity (NCA4 Southwest Chapter, KM6). Droughts and 
wildfire in the Southwest have contributed to declines in 
traditional Indigenous staple foods, including fish, wildlife, 
acorns, corn, and pine nuts. Additionally, ocean warming and 
acidification, as well as sea level rise, increase risks to shellfish 
beds (which reduces access for traditional harvesting), 
pathogens that cause shellfish poisoning, and damage to 
shellfish populations, which can cause cascading effects in 
food and ecological systems upon which some tribes depend  
(NCA4 Southwest Chapter, KM4).
Mental Health and Well-Being
Climate change may weigh heavily on mental 
health in the general population and those 
already struggling with mental health disorders. One impact of 
rising temperatures, especially in combination with 
environmental and socioeconomic stresses, is violence towards 
others and towards self. Slow-moving disasters, such as 
drought, may affect mental health over many years. 
Communities that rely especially on well-functioning natural 
and agricultural systems in specific locations may be especially 
vulnerable to mental health effects when those systems fail. In 
the Southwest, the loss of stability and certainty in natural 
systems may affect physical, mental, and spiritual health of 
Indigenous peoples with close ties to the land (NCA4 Southwest 
Chapter, KM7).
Populations of Concern
Native Americans are among the most at risk from 
climate change, often experiencing the worst 
effects because of higher exposure, higher sensitivity, and lower 
adaptive capacity for historical, socioeconomic, and ecological 
reasons. With one and a half million Native Americans, 182 
federally recognized tribes, and many state-recognized and 
other non-federally recognized tribes, the Southwest has the 
largest population of Indigenous peoples in the country (NCA4 
Southwest Chapter, Background).
CDC-Funded Jurisdictions 
Arizona Department of Health Services, CRSCI recipient, 
funded by CDC since 2010
The Arizona Extreme Weather and Public Health Program 
facilitates the development and sharing of local knowledge of 
climate and health effects and the implementation of public 
health interventions for climate-related hazards affecting the 
state’s residents and visitors, including extreme heat, wildfires, 
air quality, drought, flooding, extreme cold, and vector-borne 
diseases. Partnerships have led to heat alerts for schools and 
healthcare facilities, projects to assess and improve cooling 
center networks, and the distribution of heat safety toolkits 
for various specific at-risk populations, including outdoor 
workers, older adults, and school children. The program and 
local partners have also increased their capacity to perform 
32
heat illness surveillance activities and coordinated a state heat 
preparedness workgroup. Other program work has focused on 
understanding climate impacts on vector-borne diseases and 
the fungal disease called Valley fever, as well as developing 
public health emergency response plans for wildfires and 
flooding. This work benefits various populations such as the 
homeless, elderly, children, local officials, and residents of low 
income and minority neighborhoods.
San Francisco Department of Health, CRSCI recipient, 
funded by CDC since 2010
The San Francisco Department of Public Health’s Climate and 
Health Program works to address the local health impacts 
of extreme heat, flooding and extreme storms, drought 
and wildfire, and allergies and air pollution through the 
development of vulnerability assessments, literature reviews 
and emergency plans, data analysis and mapping, outreach 
and engagement to community-based organizations and other 
stakeholders, and working interdepartmentally to bring a health 
perspective to citywide climate action and preparedness efforts. 
San Francisco is particularly vulnerable to the health impacts 
of extreme heat. A study of a 2006 California heat wave found 
that during extreme heat events, San Francisco’s emergency 
department visits increased more than almost anywhere else 
in the state. The Climate and Health Program has helped San 
Francisco prepare for future extreme heat events by informing 
the city’s extreme heat emergency response plan, developing 
and deploying extreme heat preparedness trainings specifically 
for older adults, and engaging local clinicians about how to 
discuss extreme heat preparedness with their patients.
California Department of Public Health, CRSCI recipient, 
funded by CDC since 2012
The California Building Resilience Against Climate Effects 
(CalBRACE) project aims to prevent and reduce health effects 
associated with a change climate through state and local 
actions. In the past decade, California experienced more 
frequent and intense heat events, wildfires and droughts, and 
reduced air quality that outpaced historic records. CalBRACE 
primarily assists agencies, tribes, and community partners 
in developing policy, data, and strategies to embed climate 
adaptation, public health, and health equity benefits into 
their operations and investment plans. The staff also provides 
leadership on climate change and health equity within the 
California Department of Public Health (CDPH), and contributes 
to state publications and peer-reviewed journals. Participation 
in adaptation planning and implementation occurs through 
meetings, consultation, and technical assistance activities. 
Aligned with the Building Resilience Against Climate Effects 
(BRACE) Framework, CalBRACE maintains web-based tools 
and resources for adaptation planning, including consultation 
and engagement; hazard, vulnerability, and disease burden 
assessments; and strategies for implementation and evaluation.
San Mateo County, California, CSTE Mini-Grant,  
funded in 2019
San Mateo County assessed the magnitude and trends 
of asthma burden and adapted the Community Health 
Vulnerability Index for their jurisdiction. This allowed them to 
address specific local climate and respiratory health issues, 
especially among at-risk populations.
Pala Band of Mission Indians, NIHB Mini-Grant, funded in 
2019-2020
The Pala Band of Mission Indians (located in what is now 
called Southern California) developed climate and health 
communication and outreach materials tailored to the specific 
needs of the Pala community, including a plan highlighting the 
importance of culture-based psychosocial resilience strategies.
Alameda County, California, NACCHO Mini-Grant, 
funded in 2020
Alameda County will work to improve communication to 
vulnerable populations on protective actions and smoke 
alerts to decrease morbidity. Specifically, Alameda County 
plans to engage community stakeholders through focus 
groups to develop preferred methods of communication 
regarding air quality levels and protective action, and also 
develop a county communication flow protocol to be used by 
government agencies to send smoke alerts and information to 
disadvantaged communities and those vulnerable to smoke 
impacts.
Greenville Rancheria, NIHB Mini-Grant, funded in 2020
Greenville Rancheria (located in what is now called California) 
is building community health department capacity to respond 
to power outages during wildland fires and other disasters. This 
mini-grant project will focus on communication efforts and will 
be tailored to specific local needs of this rural community that is 
greatly impacted by wildfires.
33
U.S. CARIBBEAN 
34
Health Impacts 
Temperature-Related Death  
and Illness
Records from weather stations in Puerto Rico indicate 
that the annual number of days with temperatures above 90°F 
has increased over the last four and a half decades. A number of 
extreme temperature events occurred in Puerto Rico during the 
summers of 2012–2014, when most days exceeded 90°F. During 
San Juan’s record heat episode in 2012, stroke and 
cardiovascular disease were the primary causes of death due, in 
part, to the elevated summer temperatures in the municipalities 
of San Juan and Bayamón (NCA4 U.S. Caribbean Chapter, KM4, 
Linkage Between Climate Change and Regional Risks). 
Extreme Events
Extreme events pose significant risks to life, 
property, and economy in the Caribbean, and 
some extreme events, such as flooding and droughts, are 
projected to increase in frequency and intensity (NCA4 U.S. 
Caribbean Chapter, KM 5). Additionally, a high concentration 
of population and critical infrastructure in low-lying coastal 
areas increases vulnerability to sea level rise and storm surge 
and magnifies the effects of coastal flooding and beach erosion 
(NCA4 U.S. Caribbean Chapter, KM3, Linkage Between Climate 
Change and Regional Risks). Increasing hurricane intensity and 
associated rainfall rates will likely affect human health and well-
being, economic development, conservation, and agricultural 
productivity (NCA 4 U.S. Caribbean Chapter, KM 5).
The health impacts across the Caribbean Small Island 
Developing States (SIDS) span a large range, including physical 
injury from wind and water during hurricane passage and 
during post-event rescue and cleanup efforts, heat-related 
injury due to loss of access to air conditioning and fans, inability 
to manage chronic disease due to loss of access to electrical 
power or medical services, and increased exposure to vector-
borne diseases and diseases from contaminated water. Mental 
health impacts are also notable, as most survivors experience a 
high degree of psychological trauma during and after hurricane 
events (NCA4 U.S. Caribbean Chapter, Box 20.1: 2017 Atlantic 
Hurricane Season Impacts).
Vector-Borne Diseases
Warmer conditions may have facilitated expansion 
of the geographic range of mosquito populations 
and potentially increased their capacity to transmit Zika virus. 
Zika virus can cause a wide range of symptoms, including fever, 
rash, and headaches, as well as birth defects. The outbreak 
began in South America and spread to areas with mosquitoes 
capable of transmitting the virus, including Puerto Rico, the U.S. 
Virgin Islands, Florida, and Texas (NCA4 Health Chapter, Box 
14.2: Transboundary Transmission of Infectious Diseases).
Water-Related Illness
Dependable and safe water supplies for the 
communities and ecosystems of the U.S. Caribbean, 
Hawai’i, and the U.S.-Affiliated Pacific Islands are threatened 
by rising temperatures, sea level rise, saltwater intrusion, and 
increased risk of extreme drought and flooding (NCA4 Water 
Chapter, Regional Summary).
Puerto Rico and the USVI are projected to lose 3.6% and 4.6% of 
total coastal land area, respectively. Were such a rise to take 
place, Puerto Rico’s critical infrastructure near the coast would 
be negatively impacted, including drinking water pipelines and 
pump stations, sanitary pipelines and pump stations, and one 
wastewater treatment plant. In the USVI, infrastructure and 
historical buildings in the inundation zone for sea level rise 
include pipelines for water and sewage (NCA4 U.S. Caribbean 
Chapter, KM3, Critical Infrastructure, Property, and Real Estate). 
Food Safety, Nutrition  
and Distribution
Studies show that major shifts in fisheries 
distribution, coupled with structural and compositional 
changes in marine habitats such as coral reefs due to climate 
change, adversely affect food security, shoreline protection, 
and economies throughout the Caribbean (NCA4 U.S. 
Caribbean Chapter, KM2, Linkage Between Climate Change and 
Regional Risks). Additionally, increases in average temperature 
and extreme heat events will likely have detrimental effects on 
agricultural operations throughout the U.S. Caribbean region. 
Climate change affects cattle ranchers and dairy farmers in the 
U.S. Caribbean by reducing productivity of rangeland, causing 
a shortage of nutritional feed, increasing heat stress on 
animals, and increasing energy costs for cooling (NCA 4 U.S. 
Caribbean Chapter, KM4, Linkage Between Climate Change and 
Regional Risks).
Mental Health and Well-Being
Mental health impacts are also notable in the 
Caribbean SIDS, as most survivors experience a 
high degree of psychological trauma during and after hurricane 
events (NCA 4 U.S. Caribbean Chapter, Box 20.1: 2017 Atlantic 
Hurricane Season Impacts).
Populations of Concern
Urban areas are particularly vulnerable to 
extreme heat events, given the concentration 
of built structures, traffic, and other factors that drive the 
urban heat island (UHI) effect. Since the middle of the last 
century, urbanization and population growth have increased 
the UHI effects in San Juan. Such effects are becoming even 
more life threatening with a growing and more vulnerable 
aging population (NCA4 U.S. Caribbean Chapter, KM4, Linkage 
Between Climate Change and Regional Risks).
35
CDC-Funded Jurisdictions 
U.S. Virgin Islands, University of the Virgin Islands, 
ASTHO Mini-Grant, funded in 2017-2018
Through informal community focus groups and surveys, this 
project captured community-level knowledge and perceptions 
of climate change and water safety. Families from low-income 
communities in St. Thomas, St. John, and St Croix were invited 
to participate in educational focus groups wherein they were 
encouraged to discuss climate change, food and water safety, 
as well as extreme weather. Participants were then surveyed to 
assess their knowledge and perceptions of those topics leading 
to a better understanding of where future education should 
be offered. Compiled results informed climate and health 
adaptation and communication actions.
36
Conclusion
Climate change looks different across regions of the United 
States. Some areas may face coastal flooding, while other 
areas are already experiencing more heat waves or elongated 
wildfire seasons. This leads to different health effects in different 
localities. Local governments and their partners can assess 
risk and vulnerability and implement tailored programs and 
interventions to help protect health. CDC’s Climate and Health 
Program provides funding, guidance, and technical assistance to 
aid state, local, tribal, and territorial health agencies and staff. The 
regional examples in this document outline climate impacts that 
can affect health (synthesized from the Fourth National Climate 
Assessment) and examples of CDC-funded local activities in each 
of the regions. As climate change continues to impact human 
health, CDC resources will help localities to plan and prepare.
Selected Links and Resources						
■CDC’s Climate and Health Program webpage: 
www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth
■Fourth National Climate Assessment: 
https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/
■NOAA State Climate Summaries: 
https://statesummaries.ncics.org/
■NOAA Regional Integrated Sciences and 
Assessments (RISA) Program: 
https://cpo.noaa.gov/Meet-the-Divisions/Climate-and-
Societal-Interactions/RISA/RISA-Teams#739083-risa-teams
■EPA’s state-level climate and health impacts map: 
https://www3.epa.gov/climatechange/impacts/map-index.html
Appendix: Explanation of Graphics for Accessibility
Page 3—Impact of Climate Change on 
Human Health 
This graphic illustrates some of the various health impacts 
that can result from changes in climate. The graphic 
demonstrates that rising temperatures, more extreme 
weather, rising sea levels, and increases in carbon dioxide 
levels, can cause the following environmental conditions and 
subsequent health impacts:
■Extreme heat, which can cause heat-related illness and 
death and cardiovascular failure					
■Severe weather, which can cause injuries, fatalities, and 
have mental health impacts
■Changes in vector ecology, which can cause malaria, 
dengue, encephalitis, hantavirus, Rift Valley fever, Lyme 
disease, chikungunya, and West Nile virus
■Air pollution, which can cause asthma and 
cardiovascular disease
■Increasing allergies, which can cause respiratory allergies 
and asthma
■Water Quality Impacts, which can cause cholera, 
cryptosporidiosis, campylobacteria, leptospirosis, and 
harmful algal blooms					
■Water and food supply impacts, which can cause 
malnutrition and diarrheal disease
■Environmental degradation, which can cause forced 
migration, civil conflict, and have mental health impacts
(Return to page 3)
Page 5—Jurisdictions funded or 
previously funded by the CDC Climate 
and Health Program
This national map highlights the states, cities, counties, tribes, 
and territories that have received funding and technical 
assistance from the CDC Climate and Health Program 
directly and through partnerships with other organizations. 
Jurisdictions include:
■Alameda County
■Arizona
■Blackfeet Nation									
■Boston
■California
■Clackamas County
■Commonwealth of the 
Northern Mariana Islands
■Federated States of 
Micronesia
■Florida
■Greenville Rancheria
■Illinois
■Kaw Nation												
■Lummi Nation
■Maine
■Marquette County
■Maryland
■Massachusetts
■Michigan
■Minnesota
■New Hampshire
■New Orleans
■New York
■New York City
■North Carolina									
■Oregon
■Pala Band of Mission Indian
■Rhode Island
■San Francisco
■San Mateo County
■Seneca Nation of Indians
■Sitka Tribe of Alaska
■Swinomish Indian Tribal 
Community
■U.S. Virgin Islands					
■Vermont
■Village of Wainwright
■Washington
■Winnebago Tribe of 
Nebraska
■Wisconsin
(Return to page 5)
37
38
CS 317730-A
