Skip to main content
U.S. flag
An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know
Search
Search EPA.gov

Environmental Topics
Laws & Regulations
Report a Violation
About EPA
Air Research
CONTACT US
Healthy Heart Toolkit and Research: Steps You Can Take
Steps You Can Take to Reduce Health Effects from Air Pollution
Studies show that air pollution can trigger heart attacks, strokes and worsen heart failure in people who are at risk for these conditions. If you have a heart condition, you could benefit by reducing your exposure to high levels of air pollution.

City skyscrapers
When are air pollution levels high?
Any time of year
When weather is calm
Near busy roads
In urban areas
In industrial areas
When there is smoke
Are you at risk?
Image of the Heart
Greater risk if you have or have had:

Coronary artery disease
Angina (chest pain)
A heart attack
Bypass surgery or an angioplasty
Heart failure
An internal cardiac defibrillator
A stroke or transient ischemic attack
Blockages in the arteries of the neck or legs
Steps to Protect Your Heart
Image of people exercising
When pollution is high, you can reduce the amount of particle pollution you inhale

Know when and where particle pollution levels may be unhealthy. Particle pollution levels can be high at any time of the year. They can be higher near busy roads or industrial areas or during rush hour traffic. When there is smoke in the air from forest fires, burning vegetation or wood stoves, higher levels of particle pollution are present.
Check the Air Quality Index, which provides forecasts of daily air quality.  This index provides six color-coded categories that show different levels of health concern for air pollution levels by state or zip code.
Plan activities when and where pollution levels are lower. When particle levels outdoors are unhealthy, delay activity or exercise until the air is cleaner or move the activity indoors.
Change your activity level. When the air is polluted, reduce activity. Go for a walk rather than a jog, for example. Delay outdoor activity when the air is polluted or exercise indoors.
Reduce overall risk of heart disease or stroke. Make healthy lifestyle changes as described above.
Know the warning signs of heart attack or stroke. If you feel symptoms, even if they go away, stop any activity and seek medical help immediately.​
How to Reduce your Risk?
Image of a couple bicycling
Reduce your overall risk of heart disease and stroke

Eat healthy foods
Control blood pressure
Control cholesterol levels
Exercise more (first check with your health care provider)
Stop smoking
Take aspirin and heart medication as directed
Talk to your health care provider about treatment
Warning Signs of a Heart Attack
Chest discomfort (uncomfortable pressure, fullness, squeezing, or pain in the center of the chest that lasts more than a few minutes or goes
away and comes back)
Discomfort in other areas of the upper body (pain or discomfort in one or both arms, the back, neck, jaw, or stomach)
Shortness of breath
Other signs may include breaking out in cold sweats, nausea, or light-headedness
Warning Signs of a Stroke
Sudden numbness or weakness in the face, arm or leg (especially on one side of the body)
Confusion, trouble speaking or understanding
Problems seeing
Dizziness, loss of balance or coordination, or trouble walking
Severe headache with no known cause
Daily Air Quality
Check Pollution Forecasts
Get Free Email Alerts
Resources
Be Smart, Protect Your Heart video
Related Links
Million Hearts
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention - Heart Disease
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention - Stroke
Air Research Home
Air Monitoring & Emissions
Air Quality Modeling
Wildland Fires
Health Effects from Air Pollution
Air & Energy
Outreach, Tools & Resources
Contact Us to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.
LAST UPDATED ON NOVEMBER 29, 2023
United States Environmental Protection Agency
Discover.
Accessibility Statement
Budget & Performance
Contracting
EPA www Web Snapshot
Grants
No FEAR Act Data
Plain Writing
Privacy
Privacy and Security Notice
Connect.
Data
Inspector General
Jobs
Newsroom
Regulations.gov
Subscribe
USA.gov
White House
Ask.
Contact EPA
EPA Disclaimers
Hotlines
FOIA Requests
Frequent Questions
Follow.