Did you know that air pollution can 
trigger heart attacks, stroke, and 
other health effects?
Medical studies show that air pollution can 
trigger heart attacks, stroke, and irregular heart 
rhythms—especially in people who are already 
at risk for these conditions. Also, for people 
with a medical condition called heart failure, 
air pollution can further reduce the ability of 
the heart to pump blood the way that it should. 
Very small particles are the pollutants of 
greatest concern for triggering these effects. 
Particle pollution is found in haze, smoke, and 
dust—and sometimes in air that looks clean. 
This fact sheet tells you how you can:
•	Get up-to-date information about your 
  	 local air quality.
•	Protect your health when particle pollution
   	is at unhealthy levels.
Are you at higher risk?
Older adults and people with risk factors for 
heart disease or stroke may be at greater risk. 
You are at greater risk if you:
•	Have had a heart attack, angina, bypass 
 	 surgery, angioplasty with or without a stent, 
	 a stroke, blockages in the neck or leg arteries, 
	 heart failure, heart rhythm problems, 
	 diabetes, or chronic obstructive lung disease.
You may be at greater risk of heart disease 
or stroke (and therefore at greater risk from 
particle pollution) if any of these apply:
•	You are a man 45 years or older, or a woman 
  	 55 years or older.
•	You have a family history of stroke or early 
 	 heart disease (father or brother diagnosed 
 	 before age 55; mother or sister diagnosed 
	 before age 65).
•	You have high blood pressure or high blood 
	 cholesterol.
•	You are overweight or not physically active.
•	You smoke cigarettes.
1
2
How can you protect your health?
Regular exercise is important for staying 
healthy, especially if you have heart disease. 
By adjusting when and where you exercise, 
you can lead a healthier lifestyle and help 
reduce your risk of heart problems or stroke 
triggered by air pollution. In addition:
•	If you have heart disease or have experienced 	
	 a stroke, check with your health care provider 	
	 about the best ways to protect your health 	
	
   when the air quality is unhealthy.
•	If you’re at risk of heart disease or stroke 
	 and plan to exercise more than usual, 
   discuss this with your health care provider.
 
Know when and where particle pollution 
levels may be unhealthy.
Particle pollution levels can be high any time 
of year. Particle levels can also be high:
•	Near busy roads, in urban areas (especially 
	 during rush hour), and in industrial areas.
•	When there is smoke in the air from wood 
 	 stoves, fireplaces, burning vegetation, or 
	 forest fires.
3
Heart Disease, Stroke, and Outdoor Air Pollution
Plan activities when and where pollution 
levels are lower. 
• Avoid exercising near busy roads or 
    industrial areas.
• When particle levels outdoors are unhealthy,  
 delay your activity until the air is cleaner or   
    move your activity  indoors.
Get up-to-date information about your 
local air quality
Sometimes you can tell that the air is 
polluted— for example, on a smoggy or hazy 
day. But often you can’t see the pollution. In 
and reports on local TV, radio, or in the 
newspaper. These reports use the Air Quality 
Index, a simple color scale, to tell you how 
these reports on the Internet at: airnow.gov.
Sign up for air quality emails or get the 
AirNow app at airnow.gov. These free services 
will alert you when your local air quality 
reaches levels of concern and can help you 
plan your daily activities.
For More Information
Air quality and health:
• Air quality forecasts at airnow.gov
• Healthy Heart at bit.ly/epahealthyheart
Heart disease and stroke:
• American Heart Association at 
   www.heart.org
• American Stroke Association at 
   www.strokeassociation.org
• Center for Disease Control and
   Prevention at:      
   www.cdc.gov/heartdisease/
Change your activity level. When the air is 
how much pollution you breathe. For example, 
go for a walk instead of a jog.
Reduce your overall risk of heart disease or 
stroke.
• Make lifestyle changes like eating healthy     
   foods, exercising more, and stopping   
   smoking.
• Work with your health care provider to treat  
 conditions that increase your risk of heart 
 disease and stroke.
K
stroke (see box below). If you feel symptoms, 
even if they go away, stop your activity and 
seek medical help immediately!
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency • EPA-456/F-16-004
4
5
Reprinted with permission
© 2015 American Heart Association,Inc.
F
Chest discomfort — uncomfortable 
pressure, fullness, squeezing, or pain in the 
center of the chest that lasts more than a few 
minutes, or goes away and comes back.
Discomfort in other areas of the upper body 
— pain or discomfort in one or both arms, 
the back, neck, jaw or stomach.
Shortness of breath — often comes with or 
without chest discomfort.
Other signs — may include breaking out in 
a cold sweat, nausea, or light-headedness.




Know the warning signs
FACE: Ask the person to smile. Does 
one side of the face droop? 
ARMS: Ask the person to raise both arms. 
Does one arm drift downward? 
SPEECH: Ask the person to repeat a 
simple phrase. Is their speech slurred or 
strange? 
TIME: If you observe any of these signs, 
call 9-1-1 immediately.
F
A
S
T
Use FAST to remember the warning signs 
of a stroke:
