Skip to main content
U.S. flag
An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know
Search
Search EPA.gov

Environmental Topics
Laws & Regulations
Report a Violation
About EPA
Indoor Air Quality (IAQ)
CONTACT US
Improving Your Indoor Environment
Did you know we spend about 90% of our time indoors? Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) affects everyone, especially the most vulnerable - children, the elderly, and people with health conditions like asthma and heart disease. 

This resource provides information about the most common types of IAQ concerns, and the steps you can take to address them.

Download  the infographic
Text Version of Infographic
Image of Improving IAQ Infographic
View a printable version of the infographic
Text Version of the Infographic
Improving Your Indoor Environment 
Did you know we spend about 90% of our time indoors? 

Levels of air pollution indoors can be as high, and sometimes higher, than outdoor levels. Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) can affect anyone’s health, but older adults, children, and people with health conditions like asthma and heart disease can be more vulnerable. Learn about indoor air pollution and the steps that you can take to improve your indoor environment. 

Indoor Air and Health are Connected - Take Action 
Learn how reducing indoor contaminants may improve health. Tour the IAQ Demo House. 
Ventilate! When outdoor air quality and weather permit, open doors and windows. Run kitchen and bathroom exhaust fans when cooking and showering. 
Consider a high-efficiency air filter for your HVAC system and/ or a portable air cleaner that does not intentionally emit ozone. 
Control indoor moisture to prevent mold. Fix water leaks and keep humidity levels between 30-50% by ventilating or using a dehumidifier if necessary. 
Install and inspect carbon monoxide and smoke alarms. 
Declutter, wipe dust with a damp rag, and vacuum to help reduce asthma triggers, allergens, pests, and pollutants. 
If you rent, inform your landlord right away about indoor air quality or water concerns. You may also consult Environmental Law Institute’s Indoor Air Quality Guide for Tenants. 
Vent Your Combustion Appliances 
Vent all combustion appliances to the outside. Combustion appliances like heaters, stoves, and dryers can produce dangerous pollutants in your indoor air. 
Have your combustion appliances (like wood heaters and gas stoves) inspected annually and follow manufacturer instructions. Appliances that are not working properly can produce dangerous pollutants like carbon monoxide. 
Never use a cooking stove to heat indoors and never use a fuel powered generator indoors, even during power outages.
Consider Outdoor Air Quality 
Learn about pollution in your community and check outdoor air quality at AirNow.gov. Outdoor air pollution can impact IAQ. 
Be smoke ready. Purchase air cleaners and extra filters before wildfires start and create a clean air room. During fires, check air quality at fire.airnow.gov or local news.
Reduce Chemical Pollution Indoors
Minimize the indoor use of cleaners, pesticides, perfumes, and other household and personal chemical products. 
Use less toxic cleaning products like mild soap and water. Look for products with EPA’s Safer Choice label. 
Follow product label instructions, don’t mix chemicals, and ventilate when painting, cleaning, sanitizing or disinfecting. 
Use non-chemical methods like integrated pest management whenever possible to manage pests. Avoid using pesticide sprays and foggers. 
Avoid smoking or using e-cigarettes indoors. If you live in multi-unit housing, consider advocating for a smoke-free policy in your building.
Check for Lead and Radon
Test for lead in your home or school if it was built before 1978 and consult with your child’s healthcare provider for advice on blood lead testing. 
Test your home or school for radon and fix if needed. Exposure to radon is the 2nd leading cause of lung cancer in the U.S. 
Indoor Air Quality Home
Learn about Indoor Air Quality
IAQ by Building Type
Network and Collaborate
Popular IAQ Topics
Frequently Asked Questions
Publications
Regional and State IAQ Information
Webinars, Meetings & Updates
Contact Us to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.
LAST UPDATED ON JANUARY 25, 2024
United States Environmental Protection Agency
Discover.
Accessibility Statement
Budget & Performance
Contracting
EPA www Web Snapshot
Grants
No FEAR Act Data
Plain Writing
Privacy
Privacy and Security Notice
Connect.
Data
Inspector General
Jobs
Newsroom
Regulations.gov
Subscribe
USA.gov
White House
Ask.
Contact EPA
EPA Disclaimers
Hotlines
FOIA Requests
Frequent Questions
Follow.