Skip to main content
U.S. flag
An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know
Search
Search EPA.gov

Environmental Topics
Laws & Regulations
Report a Violation
About EPA
Indoor Air Quality (IAQ)
CONTACT US
Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) Frequently Asked Questions
Frequently Asked Questions
Asthma FAQs
Indoor airPLUS FAQs
IAQ in Schools FAQs
Mold FAQs
Radon FAQs
Search Frequent Questions for immediate answers to the most common questions or send a question to our customer care team.

Air Cleaners
What is a HEPA filter?
What is a MERV rating?
What guidelines are available to compare air cleaners?
Will air cleaners reduce health risks?
What are ionizers and other ozone generating air cleaners?
Should you use an air cleaner?
Does EPA certify/register or provide lists of acceptable air cleaners or manufacturers/sellers?
Air Duct Cleaning
Should I have the air ducts in my home cleaned?
BASE
What is the Building Assessment Survey and Evaluation Study (BASE)?
Who might use the data and findings from the BASE study?
What will the BASE data tell me about my particular building?
How has the BASE study data been used?
How can I get the BASE data?
Indoor Air Pollutants
Biological Pollutants
What are biological pollutants, how do they affect indoor air quality?
Carbon Monoxide
What is carbon monoxide?
Where should I place a carbon monoxide detector?
What about carbon monoxide detectors?
What is the average level of carbon monoxide in homes?
What do I do if I suspect that combustion appliances are affecting my health?
What are combustion products?
Formaldehyde
What should I know about formaldehyde and indoor air quality?
Secondhand Smoke/Aerosol
Who has the authority to ban or limit exposure to secondhand tobacco smoke?
What is EPA's position on children's exposure to secondhand smoke aerosol?
Is outdoor exposure to secondhand smoke/aerosol comparable to indoors?
How long do the harmful elements of secondhand smoke/aerosol linger indoors?
What's the difference between secondhand tobacco smoke and environmental tobacco smoke?
Can EPA ban smoking/vaping or otherwise limit exposure?
What can I do about secondhand smoke/aerosol coming from my neighbor's apartment?
VOCs
What are volatile organic compounds (VOCs)?
Does EPA regulate volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in household products?
Indoor Air Quality
Who can I contact to have the indoor air quality tested at my place of employment?
How much ventilation do I need in my home to improve indoor air quality?
How does outdoor air enter a building?
Has EPA issued specific recommendations on how frequently carpet should be cleaned?
What can I do to improve indoor air quality in my home?
How can I protect indoor air quality if I live in an apartment?
How can I protect indoor air quality if I am remodeling my home?
Tribal
Where can I find tribal IAQ resources and materials?
How does asthma affect tribal communities?
Where can I go to learn more about improving air quality in my tribal schools?
How can I connect with other tribal IAQ leaders?
How can I successfully work with the media to promote tribal IAQ issues?
Indoor Air Quality Home
Learn about Indoor Air Quality
IAQ by Building Type
Network and Collaborate
Popular IAQ Topics
Frequently Asked Questions
Publications
Regional and State IAQ Information
Webinars, Meetings & Updates
Contact Us to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.
LAST UPDATED ON JANUARY 31, 2024
United States Environmental Protection Agency
Discover.
Accessibility Statement
Budget & Performance
Contracting
EPA www Web Snapshot
Grants
No FEAR Act Data
Plain Writing
Privacy
Privacy and Security Notice
Connect.
Data
Inspector General
Jobs
Newsroom
Regulations.gov
Subscribe
USA.gov
White House
Ask.
Contact EPA
EPA Disclaimers
Hotlines
FOIA Requests
Frequent Questions
Follow.