Recommendations for Outdoor Activities Based on Air Quality for Schools and Child Care Facilities 
Health Effect 
Category 
Good 
  
Moderate 
  
Unhealthy for sensitive groups* 
  
Unhealthy 
  
Very Unhealthy/ 
Hazardous 
Visibility (miles) 
13+ 
9-13 
5-9 
2-5 
Less than 2 
Particulate 
levels (µg/
m3) 
1 hr 
Less than 34 
34-51 
51-89 
89-201 
Greater than 201 
8 hr 
Less than 23 
23-35 
35-62 
62-140 
Greater than 140 
24 hr 
Less than 13 
13-20 
20-35 
35-80 
Greater than 80 
Recess or Other 
Outdoor Activity 
(15 minutes) 
No limitations 
No limitations 
Make indoor space available for all children to be 
active, especially young children.  If outdoors, limit 
vigorous activities and people with chronic conditions 
should be medically managing their condition. 
Keep all children indoors. 
Keep all children 
indoors. 
Physical Education 
Class 
(1 hour) 
No limitations 
Monitor sensitive 
groups and limit their 
vigorous activities. 
Make indoor space available for all children to be 
active, especially young children.  If outdoors, limit 
vigorous activities and people with chronic conditions 
should be medically managing their condition. 
Conduct P.E. indoors.  If outdoors, only allow 
light activities for all participants.  People with 
chronic conditions should be medically 
managing their condition. 
Conduct P.E. in a safe 
(good air quality) 
indoor environment. 
Athletic Practice, 
Training 
(2-4 hours) 
No limitations 
Monitor sensitive 
groups and limit their 
vigorous activities. 
People with chronic conditions should be medically 
managing their condition.  Increase rest periods and 
substitutions for all participants to lower breathing 
rates. 
Conduct practice and trainings indoors.  If 
outdoors, allow only light activities for all 
participants.  Add rest breaks or substitutions 
to lower breathing rates.  People with chronic 
conditions should be medically managing their 
condition. 
Conduct practice and 
trainings in a safe 
(good air quality) 
indoor environment. 
Scheduled Sporting 
Events (2-4 hours) 
No limitations 
Monitor sensitive 
groups and limit their 
vigorous activities. 
People with chronic conditions should be medically 
managing their condition.  Increase rest periods and 
substitutions for all participants to lower breathing 
rates. 
Consider rescheduling or relocating event.  If 
outdoor event is held, have emergency medical 
support immediately available.  Add rest 
breaks or substitutions to lower breathing 
rates.  People with chronic conditions should 
be medically managing their condition. 
Reschedule or relocate 
event. 
Examples of light activities: 
Walking slowly on level ground 
Carrying school books 
Hanging out with friends 
Examples of moderate activities: 
Skateboarding 
Slow pitch softball 
Shooting basketballs 
Examples of vigorous activities: 
Running, jogging 
Playing football, soccer, and basketball 
Please note that the 
intensity of an activity 
can vary by person and 
ability 
See the back of this document for suggestions on how to use particulate concentration measurements and visibility guidelines to make a decision 
about poor outdoor air quality and your event.  Visit www.todaysair.mt.gov  for more information.  
*  For the purpose of this document, sensitive groups include: 
 Young children (ages 0-5 years).  Young children may be more sensitive to air pollution as their lungs are still developing and they may have an unknown 
underlying health condition. 
 People who have a chronic condition, such as asthma or another respiratory disease, or cardiovascular disease. People with these conditions may be more 
sensitive to air pollution and should talk with their primary healthcare provider about managing their condition. 
How To Use This Table And The Today’s Air Website 
 
Start early.  Well before your event, start monitoring the air quality by visiting the www.todaysair.mt.gov website. 
o Review the forecast on the today’s air website: http://svc.mt.gov/deq/todaysair/smokereport/mostRecentUpdate.aspx. 
o Review the particulate concentration measurements for your area.  If your area is not near an air monitor, follow directions below for using the 
visibility guidelines. 
 
Use the 8 and 24 hour concentration values first for the most conservative estimate of exposure and identify the health effect category 
that corresponds to this table. 
o Make any adjustments to your plans depending on the forecast and the health effect category. 
 
Continue to monitor the air quality and the forecast in your area. 
o In the 8 hours before the event, monitor the 1 hour concentrations. 
o Make any adjustments to your plans depending on the forecast and the health effect category.  Be sure to leave adequate time for decisions to 
be made before teams/participants begin travel. 
 
Air quality can change rapidly.  Based on cumulative exposure it is recommended that the 24 hour and 8 hour air quality readings be used to decide 
whether to hold or cancel an event.  Regularly review the 1 hour concentration levels before and throughout lengthy events to assess for deteriorating 
conditions.  If 1 hour air quality reading are in the Unhealthy or Very Unhealthy/Hazardous levels follow those recommendations. 
 
How to estimate air quality based on visibility: 
1. Use pre-determined landmarks that were established on a clear day for distances. 
2. Face away from the sun. 
3. Determine the limit of your visible range by looking for targets at known distances (miles).  
4. Visible range is when an object you can easily see in the distance disappears. 
5. Use the visibility values in the table to determine the local wildfire smoke category. 
 
Items to Consider when Planning for Poor Air Quality during the School Year 
 
Is there an outdoor air quality section in the school’s Emergency Plan?  If so, do you know where it is located?  
 
How do you determine the air quality category in your area? 
o Which air quality monitor do you use or what geographic spot do you use for visibility guidelines?  
 
Who makes the recommendations to hold or cancel an outdoor event?  
 
How do you communicate what the decision was based on? 
 
How do you reschedule? Are there any rules about rescheduling?  
 
How do you get information out about your decision?  If participants are already traveling, how do you notify them?  
 
What do you do with the students and parents that arrive to a postponed or canceled event?  How do you make the announcement to them?   
 
What do you do for recess on school days? 
 
What are the plans if poor air quality affects the school/playground/track/swimming pool for a long period of time? 
 
How do you document what happened? 
o What went well? What can be done better?  
