 
 
 
 
 
Wildfire smoke can irritate your eyes, nose, throat, and lungs.  
It can make you cough and wheeze, and can make it hard to breathe. 
If you have a lung disease or heart disease, inhaling wildfire smoke can 
be especially harmful.  
The most effective ways to protect yourself from wildfire smoke are to 
stay indoors, limit time outdoors and reduce physical activity.  
People who must be outside in smoky air may benefit from wearing 
masks called “particulate respirators.” Most people will find it difficult to 
wear the masks correctly. If the mask does not fit properly, it will provide 
little or no protection. Using respirator masks can make it harder to 
breathe. Anyone with lung or heart disease should check with their 
health care provider before using any mask. 
Will a face mask protect me from wildfire smoke? 
Respirator masks worn correctly may provide some protection by filtering 
out fine particles in the smoke. Masks do not help with hazardous gases 
in the smoke.  
What face mask should I get? 
N95 respirators are the cheapest and most available mask to help 
protect your lungs from wildfire smoke. They are generally available at 
hardware stores and pharmacies. Make sure the mask is: 
 
Certified by the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH). 
 
Not a one-strap paper dust mask or surgical mask. It should have two 
straps that go around your head. 
 
A size that fits over your nose and under your chin. It should seal 
tightly to your face. If the mask does not fit properly, it may not 
provide any protection. Masks with a relief valve will make breathing 
easier. 
How do I use a face mask? 
 
Place the mask over your nose and under your chin, with one strap 
placed below the ears and one strap above.  
 
Adjust the mask so that air cannot get through at the edges. Any 
leakage around the edges of the mask allows unfiltered air to enter. 
 
Pinch the metal part of the mask tightly over the top of your nose. 
 
Follow instructions on the package to check for a tight face seal. 
 
Masks fit best on clean-shaven skin. Masks do not work for people 
with beards because they will not seal. 
 
Masks are not approved for children.    
 
Throw away your mask when breathing through it gets difficult, if it is 
damaged, or if the inside gets dirty.  
 
It is harder to breathe through a mask, so take breaks often if you 
work outside. 
 
If you feel dizzy or sick go to a less smoky area, take off your mask, 
and get medical help if you do not feel better. 
 
 
 
 
 
N95 
masks 
can 
help 
protect your lungs from 
wildfire smoke. Straps must 
go above and below the 
ears. 
Wildfire Smoke and Face Masks 
 
DOH 334‐353 July 2019 
Adapted from  
California Department of Public Health 
 
A one-strap paper mask 
will not protect your lungs 
from wildfire smoke. 
A surgical mask will not 
protect your lungs from 
wildfire smoke. 
For people with disabilities, this document is available in other formats. 
To submit a request, please call 1‐800‐525‐0127 (TDD/TTY call 711). 
For More Information: 
Washington State Department of Health 
doh.wa.gov/smokefromfires  
NIOSH 
Respirator – Trusted Source Information 
 
