Skip to main content
U.S. flag
An official website of the United States government.

Here’s how you know

Here’s how you know
United States Department of Labor
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
MENU
OSHA
By Standard Number 1910.134 App B-1 - User Seal Check Procedures (Mandatory)
Part Number:
1910
Part Number Title:
Occupational Safety and Health Standards
Subpart:
1910 Subpart I
Subpart Title:
Personal Protective Equipment
Standard Number:
1910.134 App B-1
Title:
User Seal Check Procedures (Mandatory)
GPO Source:
e-CFR
Appendix B-1 to § 1910.134: User Seal Check Procedures (Mandatory)

The individual who uses a tight-fitting respirator is to perform a user seal check to ensure that an adequate seal is achieved each time the respirator is put on. Either the positive and negative pressure checks listed in this appendix, or the respirator manufacturer's recommended user seal check method shall be used. User seal checks are not substitutes for qualitative or quantitative fit tests.

I. Facepiece Positive and/or Negative Pressure Checks

A. Positive pressure check. Close off the exhalation valve and exhale gently into the facepiece. The face fit is considered satisfactory if a slight positive pressure can be built up inside the facepiece without any evidence of outward leakage of air at the seal. For most respirators this method of leak testing requires the wearer to first remove the exhalation valve cover before closing off the exhalation valve and then carefully replacing it after the test.

B. Negative pressure check. Close off the inlet opening of the canister or cartridge(s) by covering with the palm of the hand(s) or by replacing the filter seal(s), inhale gently so that the facepiece collapses slightly, and hold the breath for ten seconds. The design of the inlet opening of some cartridges cannot be effectively covered with the palm of the hand. The test can be performed by covering the inlet opening of the cartridge with a thin latex or nitrile glove. If the facepiece remains in its slightly collapsed condition and no inward leakage of air is detected, the tightness of the respirator is considered satisfactory.

II. Manufacturer's Recommended User Seal Check Procedures

The respirator manufacturer's recommended procedures for performing a user seal check may be used instead of the positive and/or negative pressure check procedures provided that the employer demonstrates that the manufacturer's procedures are equally effective.

[63 FR 1152, Jan. 8, 1998]

OSHA
Standards
Enforcement
Topics
Media Center
Contact Us
United States Department of Labor
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
200 Constitution Ave NW
Washington, DC 20210
 1-800-321-OSHA
1-800-321-6742
www.osha.gov

FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY & HEALTH
ABOUT THE SITE
Connect With OSHA

