Skip directly to site contentSkip directly to search
Español | Other Languages
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People
Air Quality
CDC
Air Quality
Ozone and Your Health
Print
ozone levels graphic
Breathing in ground-level ozone can be harmful to your health.

How can ozone affect my health?
If you have asthma, bronchitis, or emphysema, ozone can make your symptoms worse. Carefully follow your asthma management plan on days when ozone levels are high.

Ozone has also been linked to:

Coughing and pain when taking a deep breath
Lung and throat irritation
Wheezing and trouble breathing during exercise or outdoor activities
Who is most at risk?
Ozone can affect anyone, but it bothers some people more than others. People most likely to experience health effects caused by ozone include:

People with asthma or other lung diseases
Older adults
People of all ages who exercise or work hard outside
Babies and children
Protect Yourself and Your Family
The good news is there’s a lot you can do to protect yourself and your family from the health effects caused by ground-level ozone. Start by learning about the Air Quality Index.

Air Quality Index (AQI)
The Air Quality Index (AQI) tells you when air pollution is likely to reach levels that could be harmful. You can use the AQI as a tool to help you avoid particle pollution. Local TV stations, radio programs, and newspapers report the AQI. Try checking it when you’re planning your daily activities.

Take Action
When ground-level ozone levels are high, take steps to limit the amount of air you breathe in while you’re outside. For example:

Think about spending more time indoors, where ozone levels are usually lower.
Choose easier outdoor activities (like walking instead of running) so you don’t breathe as hard.
Plan outdoor activities at times when ozone levels are lower (usually in the morning and evening).
For more tools to help you learn about air quality, visit Tracking Air Quality.
 Top of Page

Last Reviewed: February 16, 2023
Source: National Center for Environmental Health
Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Syndicate
home
Air Quality
Air Pollutants
Wildfire Smoke
plus icon
Communication Tools
Infographics
plus icon
Ozone and Your Health
Particle Pollution
plus icon
Air Quality Resources for Professionals
Volcanoes and Air Quality
FEMA Trailer Study
plus icon
About CDC
Contact Us
800-232-4636
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
LinkedIn
Youtube
Pinterest
Snapchat
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
Accessibility
External Links
Privacy
Policies
No Fear Act
FOIA
Nondiscrimination
OIG
Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
USA.gov