 Hey, thank you. So last of the day, thanks for sticking around. I guess that also means that I just get to recapitulate what everybody else said before me. So this ought to be fast. And I'm going to start with slide one because I noticed that Debbie already had this picture. So that one's now been done. I also will note that I changed this. I think my original title was particulate matter or particular matter air pollution and neurologic and psychiatric function. But I'm actually not just talking about particles, but we'll come to that. So again, at the risk a little bit of repeating much of what you might have heard already today, but just so that we are on the same page again, right? When we're dealing with things like cognitive function and these brain effects, right, the first place that certainly my mind went when I started on this line was sort of the cerebral vascular link to issues of the brain. And part of that is because there's a long history of air pollution studies and not only respiratory, but certainly cardiovascular effects and that there's a strong link between cardiovascular conditions or effects and cognitive function or vascular, sorry, cognitive function, dementia, depression, maybe a little bit less anxiety, but we'll get there. Certainly subclinical cerebral vascular disease is implicated in dementia. And of course, there's a whole side of vascular dementia, although the field I think is sort of moving to putting it all together. That's a bit of an artificial distinction, but it's certainly very involved in it. And then there's also as several maybe JC was also pointing out the cerebral vascular links with depression, particularly in older age depression. So there's sort of prima facie evidence and reason to think that air pollution might be relevant for brain problems via this cardiovascular link. Again, as has been said by others today, there's perhaps a little bit newer and exciting about this is not just that, although that creates one pathway by which the air pollution might affect things going on in the brain. But there's this idea that there may be another route to effects on the brain that is in fact far more direct that would avoid systemic circulation altogether, right? So the idea that things could come up through the nose and enter the brain, possibly larger particles that just sort of hijacked the olfactory systems, receptors and the like to sort of transport particles in. Or as also has been alluded to today, the idea that when you get down in the ultra fine range, as Debbie talked a lot about, right, particles start to do weird things that are not what larger particles do, including kind of just blowing right through membranes in ways that we're not used to. And so that component of air pollution can potentially have a very direct link to the brain and potentially not even show up effects systemically, yet you might see inflammation in the brain. I will also just sort of note that if you're coming up through the olfactory bulb, your path into the brain heads right to sort of areas that are tremendously relevant for cognitive memory in particular temporal lobe areas and the limbic system, which I'll get to, which sort of spurred some of our other work, which are very important for emotional regulation. Obviously, these things happen in many parts of the brain, but the olfactory bulb sort of sticks right into their hippocampus and these other areas that are quite important for some of these functions that we care about and may want to be looking at. So again, maybe this is now to sort of recap what a lot of people have been talking about today, but particular matter exposure, and I'm realizing that Jesus, as I get older, I'm going to have to wear my glasses here. So I can even see my own slides. But right, so we have particular matter. So there are all these ways by which we can potentially affect brain function. Like, so that one's much better. I can look over there. On the right hand side, we have the more systemic effects where you can go through the lung and get into the blood system. You can have direct, you know, no, I can't even see it over there. Democ circulation, right? Leading to direct transport of these particles through the blood brain barrier or damage to the blood brain barrier, systemic inflammation that can either, you know, lead to inflammatory reactions and the like, getting through into the brain and then having changing transmitter levels, leading to inflammatory markers going up, neuroinflammation, or as depicted more on the left hand side would be that direct route that might go straight into the brain. Again, though, producing neuroinflammation, activating microglia, starting all the processes that they do. And all of the things that are boxed in red there are things that are, you know, related and have been found to be relevant for cognitive function, for brain, you know, behavioral aspects that are related to brain function. So these are sort of the mechanistic reasons we think something may be going on. And of course, others have talked in much more depth about these things. And regarding the discussion of the panel, I think this sort of interplay between epidemiology and the lab is crucial to, you know, it's a larger picture that we need to all be put in the pieces together. And the lab folks have done a great job of exploring these mechanisms. That's just saying that all of these have these consequences that are evident in many neurological and psychiatric diseases. So getting just to, actually, Maze, I don't think anybody showed a slide like this. So who's my new stuff? I get to say. Given to me, however, by a former doctoral student. So that's always nice. So this is just to explain in a graphic way about Alzheimer's disease or dementia and why things are so dramatic. These are some projections of Alzheimer's around the world. Each dot here represents 100,000 cases. And this is the situation in 1950 projection at this time in 2000 going up and by 2050 getting huge, right? So this is massively important for the entire world. This maybe doesn't take into account what people have actually been seeing. I think Ted referred to this about the idea that some folks are saying that it seems like maybe cases of Alzheimer's are slowing down, right? So what's going on with that? It's not necessarily fully explained by all the typical risk factors. So I do think it's a very interesting question of whether some of the success stories of environmental things have contributed to that. It's worth exploring. But it's a massive problem. And of course, it has huge financial and societal implications. And so just even trying to slow this a little bit could have tremendous implications for society. Now Alzheimer's, of course, is a very late life disease. And many things will head you towards that. There's things that happened before. And in fact, I think J.C. also showed the slide about the different biomarkers. And each time we sort of poke further, it seems like you can find things earlier on that are sort of predictive of what's coming. So it kind of moving that when does Alzheimer's begin picture earlier and earlier. But certainly cognitive function and disorder cognitive function is an important precursor to this. And worth studying if we're not going to just focus on dementia. These are just curves of aging, a little bit like Sam's curves of dopamine cells, a dopamine function in Parkinson's. So we have typical aging. You lose function, but maybe there's stuff going on that is faster and MCI as a precursor to dementia, et cetera. We know that cognitive decline predicts things like loss of independence, nursing home admissions, hospitalization, all this kind of stuff that is relevant. So in its own, cognitive function is something to look at in a little bit more tractable to some degree with the kind of methods that at least we started out using in our somewhat smaller populations. So when I came to this, there actually was very little, so I'd done a lot of work on lead, adult lead exposure and cognitive function. But when we started in this, there was very little on the air pollution. It was sort of new as JC, I think pointed out that sort of history of air pollution and brain effects. And in fact, at the time, there was only one study in the elderly. They'd been a little bit more done on kids. There was one study in the elderly from Germany done in very old women. In fact, JC had one of the first papers at that point on adults aged 20 to 59, I believe. But not much work in the very elderly. And so we wanted to sort of explore that in the data sets that we had access to. Before I do that, this again, probably at the risk, I think something like this was shown by Debbie or Irva. I can't remember. But I probably don't need to say this in this audience, but of course, air pollution is many things, right? So there are all the different sources, natural area, stationary, mobile. I put this up in part because these are the kind of variables that we take advantage of to build models of air pollution exposure that we can then assign exposure estimates to people. Also to point out that they're the direct primary pollutants that are directly emitted and then things can happen in the air with these things. And you get secondary stuff, including things like ozone, which is obviously not a particle. It's a gaseous component of air pollution, but it also potentially has negative effects that we need to explore. I can probably skip this one. I think this one also was up here before, right? And probably in this audience, you know this all, but particular matter is just kind of the stuff in the air. And there's different size fractions we care about. Human hair or sand dust on a beach and PM 10 is about four or five of them to a width of a hair. And then PM 2.5 out too much smaller than that. I think Debbie had the slide that even went one further and showed you the altrothines which are even smaller still. But this is what we're talking about, but it is important to keep in mind that it is just the stuff in the air, which means that depending on where you are, that stuff can be different. And it is an important question to know what portion of that air pollution may be having in effect. Okay, so having come to this when there wasn't much out there, we had been doing a lot of work on lead and cognitive function in the normative aging study in the Boston area. It's a launching cohort of men established by the VA in Boston back in the 60s, largely to look at cardiovascular health in aging. It was only men. They were recruited from the greater Boston area. It's a con misperception that it's a veterans cohort. They many of them are, but it was not to find that way. It was general residents of the Boston area. And maybe midway through or a couple of decades into this population, they started doing cognitive testing routinely. So these men come in every nowadays. It's every three years or so, but nowadays there's very few left. But they come in every three years for multiple workups in person clinical assessments. And they do do cognitive function tests starting in the 90s, and they've been doing that repeatedly as they kept coming in. And they have a whole battery of stuff done. There's the mini mental state examination, which is, as you may know, a sort of Alzheimer's screening tool, which is surprisingly effective in epidemiological studies for some reason. And then a battery of other tests like to just span backwards and pattern comparison that sort of span a different set of cognitive functions that we could take advantage of. There's a lot of air pollution work out of Harvard. And we, for this one, used a black carbon model that Joel Schwartz and colleagues described in the Croparis paper from 2007, developed, I think also JC may have shown this one as well. And black carbon is a marker for traffic pollution among other things. So that's one component of what's in the air. For our purposes, this is showing you the average, the model itself goes back to 1995. This is showing you an annual average for 1995 with red being higher levels of the black carbon and green being lower levels. And for our exposure in this, we chose to use that one year average in 1995, a sort of indicator of a long term exposures. Traffic exposures and air pollution exposures in general do have a reasonable level of correlation over time that's worth keeping in mind. It's sort of a throw away, I guess, for just how we do these things. But I will point out, so with the MMSC, it has a very odd distribution. So just to simplify, we sort of dichotomized it at really bad, which was actually about 15, 18% of the population and others. Because it's not very normally distributed. So you have to use a sort of logistic model of who's bad, who's not. And as I said, there are more than one test per person. So an average of about two of them, some had somewhat more three or four and others had only one. But we have to use sort of special techniques to account for that clustering by person. The other tests, what we did, so assessing cognitive function at any one point in time, can be tricky. There are many reasons why your cognitive function fluctuates. You may have a bad day, blah, blah, all this kind of stuff. So we actually chose to take all the test assessments as sort of independently, although clustered by person, assessing sort of a global cognitive function. So we essentially treated them as if they were all trying to get it an underlying cognitive ability and sort of mush them into one for a global score without going into great details about this. We used one year average prior to that first cognitive visit as their sort of long-term exposure. And the beauty of a big cohort, like the Norman Vaging Studies, that we have lots of other data that we get on these guys every time they come in. So we can just for a whole bunch of things, including not only individual level factors, although at the end we'll talk more about that aspect, but also census tract issues, what is their neighborhood like, things of that sort, socioeconomic status issues. Just very briefly, just to give you a smattering of who these guys are, first of all, they're all men. About 50% of them had a high school education, or at least some years of high school education. Fully 14% or so did not have English as the first language. So often is a diverse area in that respect. In the 60s, as you can imagine, there were a lot of smokers, a big smoking group, the MI, and this is more to sort of tell you that we have all these different variables that we can use and sort of enter as co-variants in our models. And again, the mean age of this group was 71 years. So we're talking about an elderly group where we might expect more decline in cognitive function to be happening, or at least that to be happening faster. So just to sum up what we, and I'm not even sure when I'm supposed to end, when am I supposed to end, Mark? Okay, I'll speed up a little bit then. So the upshot here is that we did find an association between worse MMSE score for a doubling of black carbon, also worse cognitive global score with higher black carbon in these models and in crude and also adjusted for the many different factors. That, so that started this off, and I'm actually pleased to say that I think, as JC sort of alluded to, various, there have been a fair, other number of studies now, and a lot of people are finding associations with some aspects of air pollution and cognitive performance. When I got to this point, I sort of thought, you know, from a sort of cellular molecular thinking of what's going on in the brain, if air pollution are led or having effects that might impair cognitive function, I sort of felt like the processes are not that different in emotional regulation and mental health that we wouldn't expect to see that as well, but I sort of felt that had been less, less explored than cognitive function that was important to do that. So we've done that in several settings, not just with air pollution, but the other reason to go there is that obviously Alzheimer's and dementia has massive social and public health import, but mental health disorders are tremendously important and have huge public health burden. You know, here are some stats that are probably pretty a little bit old now, but these are very big things, depression rank number one, among cases of years, liquid disability, et cetera. Now, there are many reasons, obviously, for mental health disorders, and a colleague of mine at Harvard, when I first talked about this, said, well, if you talk to any clinician about psychiatric disorders, and this was probably 10 years ago or something, she said, of course, they'll all tell you that the environment's important. It's how the mother treats the person, or it's their social circles, right? But no clinician would think to environmental toxicants, at least they didn't really think there before, but I think that there's a lot of reason to suspect that. So we wanted to expand our air pollution work not into these other regions of sort of brain health. So for that, we moved into the nurses' health study, which many of you may know, it was the nurse's health study, one recruited over 100,000 women starting in 76, and has followed them every two years with male questionnaires. They started out in 14 states and have moved across the entire country. And every two years, right, they get these male questionnaires, and there's a whole battle for what questions go on there. Turns out in 2004, they asked anxiety-related questions. It was sort of an abbreviated form of the Crown Crisp Index, which is one type of anxiety. It really focuses on phobic anxiety, so that's a bit of an issue. But the nurse's health study is also where they've done a lot of work on all those respiratory and cardiovascular outcomes related to air pollution. So they're well-developed models for the entire country that gets at things like PM10 and PM2.5 that we could take advantage of. These are the homes of the nurses, the blue dots are all the nurses. I forget which year that is, but that's roughly what you find in many of the years. And as I said, and as others have alluded to here, we can take the beauty of air pollution. We have these monitors across the entire United States. We can use that information along with land use characteristics to create prediction models of, in this case, I believe that's PM2.5 there. Across the entire United States, in fact, we have it at monthly levels. You could in theory go much finer than that. This is just a close-up showing you that when you're even in cities, you can see streets and stuff because of the increased pollution that are there. So for this anxiety work, we used exposures in the past one month, three months we created these different exposure windows. We also used the distance to road that you guys have heard is just a proxy for traffic-related particles. As the outcome, as I said, they had this crown crisp index. It's really an index of phobic anxiety and it scored up to, I believe, 16. A typical cut-off is about, is six or higher, for which 15% of the women endorsed this in 2004. And they were considered, you know, high anxiety women. There's various questions that go into that because it's, again, dichotomized as having higher, not we use logistic regression to analyze these. And again, just about these women, once again, we have all sorts of data on them. You know, there's different nursing degrees. People can have, but a large majority are, are ends because their education is reasonably similar. We actually look at the husband's education as well, which varies a little bit more than the nurses. We have other things that are both individual level and census track level to get it sort of area socioeconomic status indicators that we can adjust for. And again, this is an older set of women around, mean age of about 70. And what we found here, and this is just a few of the results, but almost any of the, first of all, we didn't see any relations with the larger size fraction, PM 2.5 to 10, that course particulate matter. But we did with the fine particulate matter. And it didn't seem to matter which time period we used, whether I think there is one month, 12 months, and then about a 10 or so year average, all were elevated. But these are looking at each of those time windows separately. And as I mentioned, there is correlation over time in air pollution. So one of the things we did here was to look at, this is now just shown as a spline, rather than an odds ratio. This is showing on the x-axis higher PM 2.5 and the y-axis higher anxiety symptoms. And this is having the one month window and the 12 month window prior to when the questioner was filled out in the model together. And in that case, the one month window seems to stand out and the 12 month window goes away. I raised this only because this issue of time-specific effects is very important in epidemiology and sort of to shorthand it. One of the things it does is it turns a spatial analysis into a temporal analysis. And that has very big implications for the kinds of things that may be confounding or getting in the way of pulling out a causal effect from this that I'll hopefully get to if I have a little time later. We also had data on depressive symptoms, which I see referenced this paper in, again, in the nurses' health study. One, there were a series of different types of questions that were asked. What we tried to do was take what we refer to colloquially as happy women in the nurses' health study who had no indication of any kind of depression prior to 1996. And based on the way the questions were asked, there were things about Dr. Diagnosis. Prior to that, we know about medication use for depression. And also a couple of times the mental health index, short and version, the mental health index 5 was administered. And 52 is a typical cutoff. And if you are above that or below that, you'd sort of considered severe depression symptoms. So we excluded anyone that had any sign prior to 1996 of depression-like symptoms. And then followed them over time for either a doctor's diagnosis of depression that they report or a first report of using antidepressant medications. We then used PM2.5 models for actually the year before the questionnaire, which they're reporting on, or also ozone we looked at, which is we just considered summer ozone because it's produced more when there's sun out. So many places don't even monitor in the winter. This is now a time series. It's a survival analysis until they become a case by either of those definitions that I mentioned. So we use Cox proportional hazards models. We also censored people if they developed conditions like cardiac conditions or cancer or stroke because we wanted to sort of avoid the possibility that that was, those could lead to depression and would sort of mess up what we were trying to look at. So we censored them. And again, we have lots of confounding variables that we can look at. Same kind of group, a slightly different proportion of them. Again, older age, they're about 67. And we stratified by region, but the first symbol there, there's three different sets. And the first symbol is the entire US. And what you're seeing here in the furthest on the left is using either first antidepressant use or a doctor's diagnosis as an indicator that they'd become a case of depression. And you can see for particular matter 2.5, there's a slight elevation across the US. There's really not, you know, bounces around if you go regional specific. The numbers get smaller, bounces around a bit, but there doesn't seem to be much difference. But there's this suggestion that when you base it on a doctor's diagnosis, there's not much there, but when you base it on medication use alone, you start to see something a little bit more elevated. It's a little bit more pronounced for ozone where we see overall, in the overall US, there's an elevated risk. But again, it seems dominated by the first use of antidepressant medication rather than a doctor's diagnosis. And, you know, there's a lot of bouncing around from region. So I don't know if our numbers are even big enough for that. So that was sort of where it stood. I'm actually glad that sort of, I think it's taken off a little bit to look at these mental health symptoms of air pollution and other toxicants, which I think is an understudied area. So that's nice. I'm giving you some limitations of the work here. This is a limited version of the limitations. There are others, but there are reasons why I'm picking on these. I'm picking on these because of other aspects that are relevant for epidemiology. We do have limitations like the timing of the outcome. Nurses health study, you know, they get the question every two years when things exactly onset. We don't know. And in any case with things like depression anxiety, that's maybe a fluid thing anyway of defining the absolute onset. There's error in measuring these things. If it's a scale, what are we actually getting at? Or even as I mentioned, cognitive function assessment, there's a lot of error in assessing that. So these are all problems that we have to overcome. Large numbers helps to some degree. Very important is exposure timing, right? When is the exposure that matters? And the one is we don't really yet know which exposure matters. But the thing I would like to drive home is that if there are specific critical windows, it has very important implications for confounding. So for example, if anxiety is affected by air pollution elements a month before, but not over the prior year, that to a large degree rules out things like socioeconomic status differences to the extent that those don't change over that period. Or both of those windows would look related to the outcome. So it helps you avoid that. And this is a concept in epidemiology known as a negative control exposure that I and others have written about that I think can be a useful tool to sort of check on what kind of residual confounding might be there, or to rule out certain types of confounding. There's also exposure misclassification. This hasn't come up a lot in the talks today, but when we're doing our air pollution assessments and trying to assign exposure, there is a lot of error in there, right? We're doing this with models built off of monitors across the country and how it relates to individual exposure, there's a lot of things that can affect that. And that is a huge problem. And what it tends to do if it's totally random would be to drive results towards the null. What I will say though is I actually think we shouldn't ignore the fact that there are huge advantages to having models like that of exposure assessment for, again, avoiding certain types of confounding. And this is something that Tom Webster and I have written about that I'll briefly mention in the next slide here, right? The issue is ultimately we think these things are affecting some target tissue and that there's really some dose of something at the target tissue that's having a biological effect. And we really are trying to estimate that, right? Now, a personal level exposure, like, you know, what's in someone's breathing zone, is very good at getting it their actual exposure, right? And what they are exposed to, much better than if I assign them the nearest monitor to tell me what they're exposed to. The problem is, you know, so the trade-off rather, I should say, because there are definite advantages of that. The trade-off is that you now are bringing in all sorts of personal behavioral factors that affect where you go and how you breathe and what you're doing and how you expose yourself to those things. And those are confounders that we try and account for and remove the confounding effect of. But we always have to write that line at the end of the paper saying, yeah, maybe we didn't do it right. If you have a model-based prediction of what someone's exposure is, those are not affected by personal behavior, right? So whatever the monitor is in downtown Sacramento is giving me a reading that is entirely independent of how much time you spend at work or at home or where your home is or how you get to your home and things like that. So it has a major flaw in that it's much less predictive than something at your mouth, but it has this big advantage that it totally removes a set of confounders that can be very tricky to deal with. And so there's been discussion of, you know, various things about air pollution, but I think one of the reasons that there's a lot of work on air pollution is I think these kinds of models have huge advantages. One is just being able to apply them to massive numbers across California or the United States. But the other is that I think it avoids certain aspects of confounding that can be difficult otherwise to handle. And we can talk about that more later. I'm happy to discuss it more. There are, of course, still confounders, but there are things that affect how you created your model. And those are a totally different set of variables and often maybe better known and better able to control for. The other aspect of negative control exposures is that what you're trying to do there, this is probably too much to get into now. But if you're trying to see whether A causes Y and you're worried about some U unknown confounder that affects both A and your outcome, if you don't account for that, you've got confounding and you could have an association that is not causal. If you know there's another exposure like B that does not cause Y, but it's affected by those U's in the same way, if you don't see any relation between B and Y, then that you can't be there. Now this was originally proposed theoretically and then a couple of papers described it in the context of, for example, using tomorrow's ozone to predict today's asthma cases. Right? Assuming there aren't time warps, we don't expect that to affect today's asthma. So if you're looking at yesterday's ozone and seeing what the asthma is today, and you look at tomorrow's ozone, and you see it's also related to asthma today, you've got a problem. You probably have residual confounding there. If you don't see it with tomorrow's ozone, then because the drivers of today's ozone yesterday's ozone and tomorrow are very similar, you are, you are much more confident that you're finding for yesterday's ozone and today's asthma is not affecting things. So there are many places where that can come in, and I think it's a tool that we should hopefully take advantage of much, much more than is being done currently. I'm pretty out of time, I out of time. All right, so just very quickly, these are the, you know, you've seen this, this is what we showed PM anxiety cognitive function depression. That's the stuff I said. I just very want, quickly want to get back now, touch a little bit on what Sam was talking about. These developmental origins of late life disease, I think, is hugely important. It's often attributed to David Barker for the Barker hypothesis about Earthweight and cardiovascular disease, who are a fours doll from Norway gets short shrift because he proposed the same thing and everybody forgets about him. But as Sam, I think pointed out, you know, it's one thing, if you're, well, not this part, it's one thing, and we do a lot of this of sort of prenatal early life exposures and things like autism, right? It's tractable because it's maybe four or five, six years apart, tractable from an epidemiologist point of view. It's quite another, as Sam said, to think, well, what is early life exposure have to do with Alzheimer's disease seven years later, because I'm not going to be around to follow a cohort that long. So what, what we've been trying to address this in many ways, I think it's hugely important. The Katie Taylor was a doctoral student who did a small study of reported head injuries and the timing of the head injuries in Parkinson's disease, and there was a suggestion of the earlier the worst it was. Same kind of idea for physical trauma and ALS using Danish registry data. And then another postdoc, you should dig her, has looked at diesel exhaust exposure from occupational work and ALS. And again, there's a suggestion that the earlier it occurred, the maybe the relevant time period, but it's really hard to do. There are huge limitations to all these, and I would not say any of them is a slam dunk, partly because getting an exposure assessment way back in the past is tricky, and in registries we don't go back that far. So one of the ways we are trying to look at this now is to take advantage of teeth, which was mentioned briefly by Irvai, I think. She talked about deciduous teeth, but your teeth actually also are little fossil records of what you were exposed to when you were a few years old. So by taking advantage of adult teeth, we can actually look in regions of the tooth to see what the exposures were to, for example, metals. And so that's one way we're trying to get around this, in a case control study to do this, but I wanted to use it also to point out that while we talk about air pollution, and again, I think one of the reasons we do so much with that are the models and the advantages of those models give us. I think I firmly, I pretty strongly firmly, no, the proper word is, believe that this is not, a lot of this stuff is not necessarily going to be unique to air pollution. It's just that we're much better at measuring it, and we have these advantages of these models. Other exposures are much trickier for this, but if we're talking about inflammation or immune activation, I don't think it's going to be specific to air pollution. So things we can find with other pollutants as well are maybe going to be related to the same types of outcomes we see with air pollution. So with this, we're looking at metals. If we could do air pollution, that would be great if anyone has ideas of going back that far. That would be terrific. If you really want to get crazy, I also think this is hugely important in another way, and I call this doha development origins of health and disease back to the future. It may not just be those pregnancy exposures, or early life exposures to you. What about the prior generations exposure? So when a mother is pregnant with a child, the germ cells of that child in her uterus that is going to go on to produce the third generation are already being formed. Okay, if it's a girl in there. And so exposures to the grandmother can actually directly affect germline cells that will make the third generation. And in fact, there's a lot of animal evidence that these exposures matter, and even that these things go transgenerational. So it's not even, it may even pass to the fourth generation through epigenetic changes to germ cells that get passed on. This is hugely interesting, with many implications, animal studies are growing in this area, suggesting that these things are happening very hard to do in human populations. I don't think we shouldn't try. We've started with a nurse's health study who they happen to be asked whether their mothers use DES during pregnancy. And we have recently found that that reporting of DES use during pregnancy is related to ADHD in the grand child. And in fact, in terms of the reporting, it seems to be more specific to the first trimester use of DES in pregnancy. Again, I'm not going to get into there. Lots of limitations of this study. It's very hard to do to go back that far. But I think we should because the animal studies are certainly suggesting this is going on. And we have every reason to worry about this in humans. And right now, germ cells are not even considered in terms of toxic and effects and regulatory processes. So if this stuff is happening, this is important and needs to be known. I would also add, it's not just the mother. We're very interested in sperm effects that might get passed on another area of interest of ours. So with that, I will just thank everybody that helped with this work and the funders, which is largely NIH EPA places like that. In particular, Melinda Power and former doctoral student, Marianti, Kimmer-Zogluz, now at Columbia, darn it. But we're still working together. She's a great postdoc. She's a wonderful postdoc. Joel Schwartz and Pantel, the Poonis and David Sparrow at the VA in Boston. And then my group. Thank you. Thank you.