 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
 
Protecting Children from  
Wildfire Smoke and Ash   
 
Background 
• Children are especially at risk for health effects 
from exposure to wildfire smoke and ash, 
mostly because their lungs are still growing. 
• Wildfire concerns include the fire itself, the 
smoke and ash, and the chemicals from 
materials that have burned, such as furniture. 
• Smoke can travel hundreds of miles from the 
source of a fire. Pay attention to local air 
quality reports during fire season, even if no 
fire is nearby.  
 
Health Effects from Wildfire 
Smoke and Ash 
• Children who breathe in wildfire smoke and ash 
can have chest pain and tightness; trouble 
breathing; wheezing; coughing; nose, throat, 
and eye burning; dizziness; or other symptoms. 
• Children with asthma, allergies, or chronic health 
issues may have more trouble breathing when 
smoke or ash is present.  
 
Preparing for Wildfires 
• Pay attention to local air quality reports. Stay 
alert to smoke-related news coverage and 
public health advisories. 
• Look up your local Air Quality Index (AQI) on the 
AirNow (www.airnow.gov) web site.  
• If Enviroflash is available for your area, sign up 
for air quality alerts. 
(http://www.enviroflash.info/).  
 
 
 
 
 
• Create a "clean room" in your home. Choose a 
room with few windows and doors.  Buy a 
portable air cleaner you can use in this room. 
Never use an ozone-generating air cleaner. 
• Stock up on food, medicine and child care 
supplies before the threat of a wildfire. 
• Remember that you may need to leave your 
home. Plan for it and prepare your children.  
During Wildfires 
• Continue to listen to local reports and public 
health warnings.  
• Keep children indoors with the doors and 
windows closed. Use your “clean room”.  If you 
have an air conditioner, run it with the fresh-
air intake closed to keep outdoor smoke from 
getting indoors. Use your portable air cleaner 
as well. Reduce health risks by avoiding 
strenuous activities. 
• Keep the indoor air as clean as possible. Do not 
smoke. Do not use gas, propane, or wood-
burning stoves, fireplaces, or candles. Never 
use ozone-generating air cleaners. Never use 
natural gas or gasoline-powered generators 
indoors. Do not use spray cans. Do not fry or 
broil meat. Do not vacuum. All of these can 
lead to poor air quality. 
• A good time to open windows to air out the 
house and clean away dust indoors is once air 
quality improves (check AirNow for updates).  
• Use common sense to guide your child's activity. 
If it looks or smells smoky outside, if local air 
quality is reported as poor, or if local officials 
are giving health warnings, wait until air 
quality improves before your family is active 
outdoors.  
 
 
 
For more information: 
Learn more about wildfire smoke: Wildfire Smoke, A Guide for Public Health Officials:     
https://www3.epa.gov/airnow/wildfire_may2016.pdf 
Get air quality information: Check the airnow.gov website, or your state air quality agency’s website. 
Air Quality Flag Program: This visual tool alerts schools and organizations and their communities to the 
local air quality forecast. https://airnow.gov/flag 
Learn about home air cleaners: https://www.epa.gov/indoor-air-quality-iaq/guide-air-cleaners-home  
Find certified air cleaning devices: http://www.arb.ca.gov/research/indoor/aircleaners/certified.htm  
Contact Poison Control at 1-800-222-1222 for emergency concerns regarding ingestion or exposure to 
hazards. 
Contact your Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Unit with children’s environmental health 
questions: www.pehsu.net 
 
 
Special considerations: 
• If your child has any problem breathing, is very 
sleepy, refuses food and water, or other health 
concerns, reduce his/her exposure to smoke 
and seek medical help right away.  
• If your child has asthma, allergies, or a chronic 
health condition, he/she is at high risk from 
health effects related to wildfire smoke and 
ash.  Seek medical advice as needed. For 
children with asthma, follow the asthma action 
plan.  
• Do not rely on masks for protection from smoke. 
Paint, dust and surgical masks, even N95 
masks, are not made to fit children and will not 
protect children from breathing wildfire 
smoke. Humidifiers or breathing through a wet 
washcloth do not prevent breathing in smoke.  
 
Evacuation 
• Seek shelter in another place (e.g., public air 
shelter) if your family does not have an air 
conditioner OR air cleaner OR if it is too warm 
in your home to stay inside with the windows 
closed. Plan to take the quickest route to the 
shelter to limit exposure to smoke. 
• Bring all medication (taken by each family 
member) with you.  
• Reduce smoke in your vehicle by closing the 
windows and vents and operating the air 
conditioning with the fresh intake closed to 
keep outdoor smoke from getting into car. 
Never leave children in a car or truck alone.  
After a Wildfire 
• Make sure ash and debris have been removed 
before bringing your child back to home or 
school.  
• Children should not be doing any cleanup work. 
Fires may deposit large amounts of ash and 
dust with harmful chemicals.  
 Avoid bringing polluted ash and dust back to 
areas used by children (such as a home or car). 
Remove shoes at the doorway, wash clothing 
separately, and change out of clothing before 
you have contact with your children. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document Authored by Marissa Hauptman, MD, MPH, Laura Anderko, PhD, RN, Jason Sacks, MPH, Lora Strine, Scott Damon MAIA, Susan Stone, MS, 
Wayne Cascio, MD, Martha Berger, MPA. Aspects of this fact sheet were adapted from 2011 PEHSU Factsheet: Health Risks of Wildfires for Children -  
Acute Phase Guidance by James M. Seltzer, M.D., Mark Miller, M.D., M.P.H, and Diane Seltzer, M.A.—Region 9 Western States Pediatric 
Environmental Health Specialty Unit.  
 
This document was supported in part by the American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Medical Toxicology and funded (in part) by 
the cooperative agreement award number FAIN: U61TS000237 and UG1TS000238 from the Agency for Toxic Substances Disease Registry (ATSDR). The 
U.S. EPA supports the PEHSU by providing funds to ATSDR under Inter-Agency Agreement number DW-75-92301301. Neither U.S. EPA not ATSDR 
endorses the purchase of any commercial products or services mentioned in PEHSU publications. 
 
This factsheet is dedicated in memory of Dr. James M. Seltzer as well as the first responders and others who have been affected by wildfires.  
