Personal-Level Protective Actions Against Particulate Matter Air Pollution Exposure: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association
Sanjay Rajagopalan, Michael Brauer, Aruni Bhatnagar, Deepak L. Bhatt, Jeffrey R. Brook, Wei Huang, Thomas Münzel, David Newby, Jeffrey Siegel, Robert D. Brook and … See all authors 
Originally published5 Nov 2020https://doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000931Circulation. 2020;142:e411–e431
is corrected by
Other version(s) of this article
Abstract
Since the publication of the last American Heart Association scientific statement on air pollution and cardiovascular disease in 2010, unequivocal evidence of the causal role of fine particulate matter air pollution (PM2.5, or particulate matter ≤2.5 μm in diameter) in cardiovascular disease has emerged. There is a compelling case to provide the public with practical personalized approaches to reduce the health effects of PM2.5. Such interventions would be applicable not only to individuals in heavily polluted countries, high-risk or susceptible individuals living in cleaner environments, and microenvironments with higher pollution exposures, but also to those traveling to locations with high levels of PM2.5. The overarching motivation for this document is to summarize the current evidence supporting personal-level strategies to prevent the adverse cardiovascular effects of PM2.5, guide the use of the most proven/viable approaches, obviate the use of ineffective measures, and avoid unwarranted interventions. The significance of this statement relates not only to the global importance of PM2.5, but also to its focus on the most tested interventions and viable approaches directed at particulate matter air pollution. The writing group sought to provide expert consensus opinions on personal-level measures recognizing the current uncertainty and limited evidence base for many interventions. In doing so, the writing group acknowledges that its intent is to assist other agencies charged with protecting public health, without minimizing the personal choice considerations of an individual who may decide to use these interventions in the face of ongoing air pollution exposure.

Ambient air pollution is the world’s leading environmental risk factor contributing more to global morbidity and mortality than many other common risk factors.1–4 In a recent report from 5 national academies, the evidence associating fine airborne particulate matter air pollution (PM2.5, or particulate matter <2.5 μm in aerodynamic diameter) produced from the combustion of fossil fuels, with heart disease, stroke, chronic obstructive lung disease, lung cancer, and premature birth was determined to be unequivocal.5 The 2015 Global Burden of Disease document associated ambient PM2.5 with 4.2 million premature deaths, with more than one-half of these deaths attributable to cardiovascular disease (myocardial infarction, strokes, and heart failure).4 The latest estimation of the global health burden based on an updated exposure-risk curve reliant exclusively on outdoor ambient sources, which included studies in heavily polluted countries, estimated the global burden attributable to PM2.5 to be ≈9 million deaths per year, potentially through the impact on other chronic diseases (eg, diabetes).3

Despite significant improvement in air quality in North America and Europe, >90% of the globe continues to face concentrations of PM2.5 above the World Health Organization annual air quality guidelines of 10 μg/m3.6 The greatest public health burden posed by PM2.5 air pollution remains among countries in Asia, given the enormous number of individuals impacted by very high levels of this pollutant. However, mounting evidence suggests that health risks attributable to PM2.5 persist even at low levels, below World Health Organization air quality guidelines (annual levels <10 μg/m3) and US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) National Ambient Air Quality Standards (annual and daily levels <12 and 35 μg/m3, respectively).3,7–10

Because of an aging population and growing number of at-risk individuals (eg, patients with cardiovascular disease), significant reductions in PM2.5 levels will be needed to prevent an increase from this already unacceptably high public health toll.1,4 The Lancet Commission report and the 5 academies report emphasize legislation, policies, regulation, and technology, coupled with enforcement, as key components of successful programs.1,5 Although urgent and effective changes in national policy to reduce fossil fuel emissions through clean power sources and built environment reform are critical to air quality management, the political and societal momentum to accomplish such goals may not be easy to generate in many parts of the world.11

Since the publication of the latest American Heart Association (AHA) scientific statement, there has been growing interest in providing evidence-based personal-level strategies as additional and interim measures to avert the harmful effects of particulate matter air pollution.12–14 Indeed, given the fact that access to clean air and water could be viewed as an inalienable human right, there is a compelling case to be made to provide the public with practical personalized approaches to reduce or even prevent exposures. These interventions would be applicable not only to citizens living in countries such as India and China, but also to the millions of high-risk or susceptible individuals living in cleaner environments, and vulnerable subsets of individuals living in microenvironments with higher air pollution exposures (eg, near roadways, urban settings, or forest fires), and finally for those traveling to heavily polluted locations.

The overarching motivation for this document is to summarize the current evidence for personal-level strategies to prevent PM2.5 health impact, help guide and facilitate rational use of the most proven or viable approaches, circumvent the use of ineffective or unreliable measures, and avoid unwarranted interventions when none may be required. In doing so, the focus here is on PM2.5, in part, because it is the air pollutant posing the largest global health threat, and because most of the tested interventions and potentially viable personal-level approaches are designed to reduce exposure to particles and may not be effective against gaseous copollutants. Nonetheless, many actions that aim to lower PM2.5 exposure (eg, staying indoors, changing driving patterns) could potentially decrease exposures to other pollutants (eg, ozone, ultrafine particulate matter [UFP]).

An additional intent of this document is to help raise awareness of prevention aspects, a topic that has received less attention than the high disease burden attributable to PM2.5 should warrant. Furthermore, it is anticipated that the document could facilitate public awareness of no-cost practical strategies (eg, prudent lifestyle actions) to mitigate PM2.5 air pollution exposure. We recognize the current uncertainty and limited evidence base surrounding the efficacy of many interventions that may raise ethical concerns about their recommendation, without significant evidence, in particular, in resource-constrained environments. We further recognize the critical need for education of the public to appreciate air pollution as a critical risk factor, and the need to develop carefully researched and consensus communication/health alert strategies, as well, to inform the public to facilitate the prevention of adverse exposures, while alleviating unnecessary public anxiety, in particular, when no emergency actions may be warranted. In this context, this scientific statement does not supplant or replace the recommendations of other organizations specifically charged with protecting public health, and neither is the intent to minimize multiple other social, resource, and cultural constraints that may affect the personal choice of individuals who may wish to use these interventions.

Air Pollution Components, Sources, and Special Considerations
The sources, components, and toxicities of air pollutants have been extensively reviewed before.14,15 In brief, PM can be classified on the basis of diameter into: ≤10 μm (thoracic particles [PM10]), ≤2.5 μm (fine particles [PM2.5]), <0.1 μm (UFP), and between 2.5 and 10 μm (coarse [PM2.5–10]). Although PM2.5 is the component with the most robust evidence and the focus of this document, a growing body of studies supports the health effects of other components of air pollution, including gaseous copollutants and traffic-related UFP.15,16

The biological effects of exposure to air pollution represent the composite effect of many features related to physiochemical properties, with stability, lung deposition/systemic penetration being important in determining systemic effects. However, these features may not be feasible or practical to measure on a routine basis.15,17

Multiple aspects of the physical and social environment can also modify the health effects of exposures, including poor housing, lack of green space, poor diet, and access to health care.18–21 Meteorological conditions such as wind speed, humidity, temperature, and diurnal changes can alter the composition and propagation of air pollution, affecting the size of the population exposed.14,22

Although regulation and control of ambient air pollution is a highly cost-effective intervention in reducing particle-related mortality, most individuals across the globe spend the preponderant majority of time indoors and may be exposed to household air pollution.23 Household air pollution can encompass a range of particles that originate not only from outdoor ambient pollutants that penetrate indoors, but also from specific indoor sources (eg, cooking, wood, biomass burning, and tobacco smoke). These may vary depending on geographic, socioeconomic, and cultural factors.24 From an exposure prevention perspective, understanding the sources, components, and spatial and time domains of exposure is of critical importance. Strategies to prevent exposure include source removal, source control, and personalized mitigation strategies, including education, which may need to be tailored depending on the contextual importance of each of these factors, are highly effective.

Proximity and exposure to sources such as wildfires are becoming more prevalent with climate change, and these sources, and the emissions from dust storms and volcanic eruptions, as well, also need to be considered in the context of prevention measures.25,26 PM2.5 exposure from wildfire smoke, for instance, is associated with increased cardiovascular events with effect estimates comparable to those with ambient PM2.5.27–29 Similarly, dust storms have been associated with cardiovascular events.30

Other exposures such as from biomass burning (eg, forests and crops), from natural sources (eg, volcanic smog), and from combination events attributable to cascading hazards are also important to consider from a global public health perspective.26,31 Short-term travel to heavily polluted environments has been associated with adverse alteration in cardiopulmonary surrogate measures, such as diminution in pulmonary function32 and heightened oxidative stress,33 with reversal on return to low-exposure environments.33

Air Pollution–Mediated Cardiovascular Events
As reviewed in detail elsewhere, a variety of biological pathways by which air pollutants can cause cardiometabolic diseases have provided compelling mechanistic support for epidemiological associations.34–36 PM2.5 promotes a host of adverse health effects ranging from cancers and pulmonary diseases, metabolic disorders, and adverse birth outcomes.1,2,15,37 Short-term exposure (over hours to days) increases risk for myocardial infarction, stroke, heart failure, arrhythmia, and sudden death, each by ≈1% to 2% per 10 μg/m3.2 Longer-term exposure over months to years amplifies these risks to 5% to 10% per 10 μg/m3.2 PM2.5 is more than just a trigger of acute cardiovascular events.

Living in regions with worse air quality potentiates the atherosclerotic process and promotes the development of several chronic cardiometabolic conditions (eg, diabetes, hypertension).2,34,38,39 PM2.5 inhalation elicits oxidative stress and inflammatory responses that are not confined to the lungs, but can reach the systemic circulation and relevant organs/tissues, as well (eg, vasculature, adipocytes, hypothalamus).2,40,41 The pathways are complex and likely influenced by the composition of the particles, copollutants, and the susceptibility of the host. Some of the most pathophysiologically important mechanisms include vasomotor disturbance (eg, endothelial dysfunction, vasoconstriction, reduced arterial compliance), alterations in systemic hemodynamics (eg, increased blood pressure [BP]), adverse metabolic effects (eg, insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, high-density lipoprotein, and adipocyte dysfunction), coagulation-thrombosis potential (eg, increased platelet activation, hypercoagulability), arrhythmogenesis (eg, altered heart rate variability [HRV], increased atrial and ventricular arrhythmias), and the atherosclerotic process (eg, increased plaque progression and vulnerability).2,15,34

Current Approaches and Limitations of PM2.5 Monitoring
Current methods to convey and forecast the health risks of air pollutants to the public include the Air Quality Index in the United States and the Air Quality Health Index in Canada. These rely on estimates of ambient air pollutants from regulatory networks at relatively coarse spatial scales (eg, countywide or citywide, 1 km × 1 km) and are typically limited to time periods of 1, 8, or 24 hours.42 Mathematical models incorporating PM2.5 levels can then be used to forecast levels over 24 to 48 hours.

Remote sensing of air pollutants using satellites by aerosol optical depth and atmospheric models that simulate the complex chemistry and transport of pollutants are widely available and are used to impute surface-level particulate matter concentrations across the globe.6 Satellite data currently are low temporal resolution, restricted to 1 to 2 measurements per day, and limited at night and by cloud cover. The temporal and spatial resolution of atmospheric models, although better than satellite models, is inherently dependent on high-quality monitoring and time-varying emission estimates. However, the performance of these models is comparable to that of established regional air quality–derived data when these have been examined.42 Their ability to forecast pollution values several days in advance also render them well suited for risk communication.42

It is widely acknowledged that the urban environment cannot be fully characterized using sparse static networks of air pollution monitors, because the concentrations of regulated criteria air pollutants can vary significantly.43 Ambient pollutant concentration levels regardless of the technique are typically only weakly associated with actual exposures encountered by any single individual residing within a location because of many factors (eg, commuting, household and building factors, outdoor time, activity, local/point sources). Furthermore, outdoor monitoring of PM2.5 does not represent indoor concentrations.43

There has been substantial interest in deploying low-cost stationary and portable sensor systems in areas where no monitoring exists, or to help extend the spatial and temporal resolution of existing networks.43 Each of these technologies has strengths (eg, temporal resolution of minutes or hours), but also technical (large variability in performance), practical (eg, difficulty accessing and using data), and cost limitations. In addition to issues regarding calibration, maintenance, and stability, an important challenge of air pollution data from nonregulatory monitors that report frequently sampled data (eg, 1-minute averages of pollutant concentrations) from alternate technology platforms is in aligning and adjusting values at this time scale to regulatory network data that report hourly or longer averages.44

This is an important aspect that needs resolution before these values can be incorporated into health messaging and alerts. Although these new technologies can certainly benefit research efforts on multiple fronts, their impact in averting exposure and reducing PM2.5-associated health risk is currently unknown. However, it is clear that the existing traditional methods that focus on reporting acute (ie, daily) and chronic (ie, annual) concentrations of PM2.5 work well and are well-linked to adverse cardiovascular outcomes. At the present time, there is limited justification to use very short-term exposure levels from nonregulatory monitoring as part of health messaging.42

Air Pollution Alerts and Approaches to Communicate Risk
At present, there is no accepted international consensus or standardization of approaches to communicate air pollution levels and risk, resulting in a myriad of air quality indices throughout the world. The EPA’s Air Quality Index converts concentrations of the 6 regulated criteria air pollutants (ozone, PM2.5, PM10, carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, and sulfur dioxide) into bands of increasing health concern (Table 1). The Air Quality Index is a threshold metric, based on the (location-time–specific) single-pollutant level, closest to its short-term National Ambient Air Quality Standards limit.46 More complex indices, such as the Air Quality Health Index in Canada, base recommendations on multipollutant concentration-response coefficients derived from epidemiological acute exposure analyses.47 In both cases, given their formulations and the emphasis of government monitoring data on high-resolution temporal, but low-resolution spatial information, the indices and their behavioral recommendations are focused on the population health impact of short-term exposures and are most applicable to bouts of high air pollution episodes. The Air Quality Health Index, but not the Air Quality Index,48,49 has been demonstrated to be predictive of population health responses50–52 and individual clinical cardiovascular disease measures.53,54 Although only a small proportion of individuals follow the accompanying behavioral recommendations, those who do can reduce their individual exposure.47,55 Evidence indicating that such communications and recommendations reduce health impact among the general, more susceptible, or even compliant populations is still limited, in particular, for cardiovascular outcomes.56,57 Tools to communicate long-term exposure risk at neighborhood scales are needed to more accurately convey the major portion of the health risk attributable to air pollution.58 Such tools could be used by healthcare providers to prioritize the use of personal preventive measures (eg, indoor air cleaners), target treatment and prevention strategies, and by public health officials to highlight areas in greatest need for air quality management. The increased access and availability of air pollution monitoring data from low-cost sensors and portable monitors at high spatial and temporal resolution has generated a need for interpretation of the impact of short-term personal exposures on cardiovascular health and aligning the messaging with established approaches from regulatory monitors to avoid confusion and providing uniform consistent messaging.42 Open source platform technologies, harmonization of values/reporting, and recommendations that are consistent and valid are needed before they are used in messaging. Not addressing these issues has the potential for creating mass anxiety and misinterpretation and potentially unnecessary modification of behavior and activity.

Table 1. Air Quality Index and US Environmental Protection Agency Recommendations

AQI*	United States
Rating	Interpretation	Corresponding average daily PM2.5 levels
0–50	Good	Satisfactory air quality posing little or no acute risk	<12
51–100	Moderate	Moderate concerns in unusually susceptible individuals	13–34
101–150	Unhealthy for susceptible groups	General public is unlikely to be affected.
Acceptable to be active but susceptible populations should reduce prolonged or heavy exertion outdoors.	35–54
151–200	Unhealthy	General public may begin to experience health effects and should begin to take steps to reduce exposure.
Susceptible populations should reduce prolonged or heavy exertion outdoors and move activities indoors.	55–149
201–300	Very unhealthy	General public should reduce prolonged or heavy exertion outdoors. Move activity indoors, and reschedule outdoor events.
Susceptible populations should avoid all physical activity outdoors and take measures to reduce indoor particle levels.	150–249
301–500	Hazardous	General public at risk. Should avoid all physical activity outdoors.
Susceptible populations should avoid all activity outdoors and keep activity levels low. Take measures to reduce indoor particle levels and outdoor exposures with personal protection devices.	>250
>500	Beyond hazardous	Everyone at risk and should avoid all physical activity outdoors. Take active measures to reduce indoor particle levels and outdoor exposures with personal protection devices.	>300
AQI indicates Air Quality Index; and PM2.5, fine particulate matter, defined as particles <2.5 μm in diameter.

* Elevated AQI may vary depending on maximal level of type of criteria air pollutant. In general, in the United States, it is more likely to be related to elevated ozone. Derived from US EPA Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards.45

Vulnerable Populations and Susceptibility Factors
The Clean Air Act requires the EPA to identify and protect not only the general public but also the most susceptible populations.59 Increased susceptibility connotes that a group of individuals (eg, elderly adults) are at higher risk for adverse health effects than the general population facing the same level of exposure.60 Vulnerability is a term that means a group of people (eg, those living in low-income, urban communities) who are more likely to face higher levels or more toxic mixtures of pollutants.59 Air quality is often worse in locations where vulnerable residents are socioeconomically disadvantaged and are less capable of protecting themselves from the potential health risks associated with air pollution.

A review of 37 studies found that economically disadvantaged communities in North America, Asia, and Africa, but less so in Europe, may experience higher levels of air pollution.18 Prior large epidemiological studies have shown that susceptible populations are those with prior cardiovascular or pulmonary disease, those who have received organ transplants, older individuals (>65 years of age), African American or Hispanic people, and individuals with obesity and diabetes. These groups have greater mortality risk with PM2.5 air pollution exposure than groups without these demographics.2,7,61–63 Women have also been shown in some studies to have higher risks of developing cardiovascular events from air pollution, although whether certain additional demographics within women confer risk is not clear.64

Across all of these at-risk groups, air pollution is independently associated with increased risk for the development of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Whether this is explained by biological or exposure estimation factors (eg, more time at home) remains to be clarified.2 Given that, in all of these groups, conventional risk-factor modification is well known to be protective, it may therefore be imperative to apply preventative therapies to these groups and optimize cardiovascular risk-factor modification as a first step. In addition, one may consider these at-risk groups as high-priority targets for individualized interventions to reduce air pollution exposure,

Developing a Framework for Clinical Recommendations and Individual Exposure Mitigation Strategies
The AHA, American Thoracic Society, European Sociey of Cardiology, and national academies from 5 countries have all recognized the global importance of air pollution as a risk factor for cardiopulmonary disease.5,14,65,66 Healthcare workers, including physicians, nurses, community health workers, and other health professionals, have, however, lacked the practical knowledge to counsel their patients. Given the current uncertainties in the efficacy of a number of personal measures to mitigate risk, a range of ethical questions regarding the use of interventions and even if organizations including the AHA, which may be under substantial pressure to act, should provide advice on, or recommend measures to mitigate potential risk, has been raised.67

A core principle before proffering public health measures is that the advice should be based soundly on data supporting efficacy. Informed decision making is difficult when there is no evidence, or weak/incomplete evidence, and is 1 major reason why there has been a reluctance to put forth recommendations on individual measures to mitigate air pollution risk. However, an ethical framework to guide decision making also involves multiple other domains, including precautionary principles that argue for protecting the common good, even in the absence of substantial evidence, in particular, when the principles are innocuous and involve very little economic burden.67

Clinical Approach to Risk Mitigation
Given the vast population (ie, billons of people) impacted by air pollution worldwide, an untargeted or universal strategy for personal-level intervention is not feasible, nor is it likely to be the most effective approach (from cost, effort, and equity standpoints). Mandatory regional or national-level policies to reduce fossil fuel emissions at the population level, in particular, those that have both short-term climate and health cobenefits are highly effective.1 However, because comprehensive air quality management typically takes time to be implemented, healthcare workers and even the public must be empowered with tools to help effectively communicate and mitigate cardiovascular risks of air pollution. For optimal impact, (1) the approach should be practical, safe, and low cost or no cost; (2) the degree of intervention should be congruent with the risk of the patient (susceptible populations) and exposure (vulnerable populations); and (3) it should be feasible for the approach to be applied equitably.

An assessment of health risk of the patient/community and degree of exposure is thus important to optimally implement any intervention. The need and urgency plus intensity of any recommended intervention must be weighed, considering the ratio of their potential benefits versus risks for each individual. Although the risks may be quite low for personal mitigation measures, risk includes wasted effort, resources, or inappropriate concern. For instance, a susceptible patient at high absolute risk for morbidity and mortality (comorbidity or special consideration) who resides in a vulnerable environment of high air pollution exposure (eg, urban setting with daily levels intermittently above National Ambient Air Quality Standards), would have the highest priority for using acute interventions to mitigate their risk. At the other end of the spectrum, a young or healthy person at low absolute risk for cardiopulmonary events is less likely to benefit from any special interventions, except under the most extreme air pollution levels.8,14 After taking necessary acute actions, secondary consideration for less intrusive long-term interventions (eg, portable air cleaner) should also be given, based on chronic air pollution levels. Education on air pollution–mediated cardiovascular events should be provided to all patients, regardless of risk, especially in environments with high levels of ambient PM2.5. Figure 1 outlines a clinical framework to prioritize personal interventions when risk exceeds a certain threshold guided by PM2.5 levels. By no means is this approach intended as an evidence-based recommendation, but it represents 1 potential practical approach.

Figure 1.
Download figureDownload PowerPoint
Figure 1. Potential clinical approach to determine if personal-level interventions are needed. *Represents daily PM2.5 levels. Given the fact that indices like the Air Quality Index (AQI) and Air Quality Health Index may be influenced by other pollutants, PM2.5 values are used in this suggested approach. The threshold values of 12 and 300 μg/m3 represent daily averages and correspond to the corresponding AQI limit of 50 and 450, respectively. The value of 35 μg/m3 corresponds to the daily National Ambient Air Quality Standards limit for PM2.5.45 ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; CKD, chronic kidney disease; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; HVAC, heating ventilation and air conditioning; PAC, portable air cleaner; and PM2.5, fine particulate matter, defined as particles <2.5 μm in diameter.

Personal Exposure Mitigation Strategies
No personalized intervention to reduce air pollution exposure has been shown to reduce cardiovascular events. However, 3 sets of findings should increase our confidence that personal risk mitigation could have health benefits. First, empirical data overwhelmingly support the association between increased exposure to PM2.5 and cardiovascular events. Second, there is strong evidence that filtration interventions can reduce exposures to PM2.5. Third, there is emerging evidence that personal exposure mitigation may help improve surrogates that predict future adverse cardiovascular events. Conversely, it follows that a measure that is ineffective in reducing particle concentrations will not reduce exposure-related cardiovascular events. Figure 2 depicts commonly used personal exposure mitigation approaches, including personal protection, behavioral, and pharmacological approaches.

Figure 2.
Download figureDownload PowerPoint
Figure 2. Individual exposure mitigation strategies. Personal exposure reduction, behavioral pharmacologic approaches are highlighted. HVAC indicates heating ventilation and air conditioning.

Portable Air Cleaners
Portable air cleaners (PACs) are inexpensive and can be used in nearly all homes and apartments in locations with electricity. This is of critical importance because people spend more than half of their time indoors in their own home. However, it is likely that their efficacy to reduce indoor PM2.5 levels will be inferior in residences that are not air-tight (eg, many windows, leaks to outdoor air) or that are located in hot environments without air conditioning where outside windows may remain open for prolonged periods of time. The EPA provides guidance on various types of PACs.68 In general, a PAC that runs for longer durations at higher flow rates is likely to be more effective. Media air filters capture particles through deposition on filter materials. Electronic or electrostatic air cleaners ionize incoming streams of particles, allowing deposition of particles onto a charged plate, but may coincidentally result in the production of ozone, and thus are not recommended. In general, PACs are designed to clean air in a small area (ie, single room). Unlike central residential heating ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) systems that may provide spatially uniform reductions in particles, a PAC placed in a poor location could result in an attenuation in efficacy.

The central metric used to describe PAC devices is the clean air delivery rate (CADR), which is the product of flow and efficiency and represents an index of clean air delivered by an air cleaner. The CADR when normalized by the room volume needs to be competitive with the ventilation, and deposition loss rates need to be effective. The most common test standard and industry certification for measurement of CADR is the American Home Appliance Manufacturers AC-1-2019, which measures CADR for dust, pollen, and tobacco smoke. Some challenges with the use of PACs are bypass (especially when filter media becomes loaded), short circuiting (cleaning the air in the immediate vicinity of the air cleaner rather than in the entire room), resuspension of particles because of high air velocities near the floor, and noise.69 Best practices for using PACs include selecting an air cleaner with an appropriate CADR for the room; using the PAC at the highest speed possible when the room is occupied and as close to the individual that is to be protected; changing the filter media according to the manufacturer’s recommendation; and avoiding any air cleaner process that may generate ozone (eg, ionizing air cleaners).

The evidence to date on the impact of PACs in improving indoor air quality has been mostly at relatively lower levels of PM2.5 (5–50 μg/m3), although more recently there have been studies from Asia at much higher concentrations.70–73 In most of these studies, the use of PACs has been shown to reduce indoor PM2.5 by as much as 50% to 60%.71,74–77 A few studies have also now shown that PACs not only lower indoor PM levels in a designated room, where they are positioned, but can also reduce the average exposure over 24 hours by >40% (measured by a personal monitor) among individuals residing in the residence but who are not otherwise restricted in activities outside their household).78 This has important implications if PACs are to be considered as a potential intervention. The results also suggest that it is important to position a PAC in the bedroom, given the prolonged time spent in this room sleeping.79

PAC use has been consistently shown to be associated with decreased odds of respiratory symptoms.80 Studies since 2008 have begun exploring outcomes other than lung function, such as BP, HRV, endothelial function, plasma oxidative stress/inflammatory markers, whereas a few have focused on noncardiorespiratory outcomes including adverse fetal outcomes.81 There have been some studies that have examined the impact of PAC on wildfire smoke with impressive reductions in indoor PM2.5 levels.82 A review was conducted on studies using PACs or other indoor air filtration systems (not HVAC units) on cardiovascular surrogate outcomes since 2008. A total of 14 randomized studies were identified (Table 2). All of the studies were short term (longest duration 21 days) and reported outcomes on concentrations of indoor and outdoor PM2.5. These included 9 randomized double-blinded crossover studies, 2 single-blinded crossover studies, and 3 randomized crossover trials involving a PAC. Ten involved the use of PAC with a high-efficiency particulate arrestance (HEPA) air filter, 1 trial involved the use of a window-mounted unit, and 4 studies involved electrostatic or electronic filters. The primary study outcomes were cardiovascular and respiratory health indicators and biomarkers of systemic inflammation. Although the study participants were mostly healthy, they ranged from school students to elderly individuals. Reductions in indoor PM2.5 concentrations were observed in studies ranging from 18% to 82% (Table 2). When studies that assessed the impact of indoor air filtration on BP,70–73,76,78,83–85 reactive hyperemia index, and measure of microvascular endothelial function76,83,86–88 were evaluated, the overall trend across these studies appeared to suggest reduced systolic BP, ranging from reduction in some studies70,71,76,78,85 to no change in other studies.72,73,83,84 Similarly, diastolic BP also was reduced in most of these studies. Reactive hyperemia index increased in 2 studies87,86 and was unchanged in 3 studies.76,83,88 Several other indicators were also assessed using similar approaches but in fewer studies, including HRV indices (standard deviation of normal-to-normal interval, root mean square of the mean differences in successive normal-to-normal intervals, low frequency, high frequency), lung function (forced expiratory volume in 1 second, peak expiratory flow, forced vital capacity), systemic inflammation (C-reactive protein, interleukin-6, interleukin-8, fibrinogen, tumor necrosis factor-α, P-selectin, etc), and oxidative stress (malondialdehyde, 8-hydroxy-2′-deoxyguanosine). For some of these circulating parameters, effects were not always consistent across study populations in terms of the direction, magnitude, and timing of response and may reflect differences in study populations, design considerations, and potential confounders. PACs are affordable with the average cost for a low-power air cleaner with capacity to clean a middle-sized living room costing <US $250. Given their very small upfront cost and potential benefits in reducing cardiopulmonary outcomes, estimates modeled on the reduction of outdoor air pollutant concentrations have suggested that intervention with a PAC may have a very favorable benefit-to-cost ratio, resulting in ≈64 000 premature deaths prevented each year in the United States, with economic benefits exceeding $1000 per person per year, translating into $0.32 trillion in benefits when extrapolated into the entire US population of 320 billion.23 However, despite their potential effectiveness and affordability, a very small proportion of the world’s population uses these devices, with even fewer using them regularly, in part, because of a lack of awareness.

Table 2. Trials Using Portable Air Cleaners on Surrogate Cardiovascular Outcomes

Indoor portable air filtration or cleaning systems
Authors and location	Population	Study design	Intervention	Outcomes	Reduction in air pollution	Principal findings
1. Li et al70
Shanghai, China
(n=55) 2017	College students	Randomized, double-blind, crossover	PAC HEPA vs sham filter for 9 d	Plasma metabolomic profile. BP, stress hormone, oxidative stress/inflammation	PM2.5 reduced by 54% (53.1 vs 24.3 μg/m3)	Significant decrease in SBP and DBP and insulin resistance. Decreased oxidative stress markers, glucose, amino acids, fatty acids, cortisol, cortisone, epinephrine, and norepinephrine with HEPA
2. Chen et al.71
Shanghai, China
(n=35) 2015	College students in dormitories	Randomized crossover study	PAC Electrostatic (non-HEPA) filter vs sham for 48 h	BP and inflammatory markers	PM2.5 concentration by 57% (96.2 vs 41.3 μg/m3)	Significant decrease in SBP, DBP Decrease in MCP-1, interleukin-1β, myeloperoxidase and platelet activation (sCD40L) with HEPA vs sham
3. Shao et al72
Beijing, China
(n=35) 2017	Seniors (57% COPD, 26% CVD), 66–67 y	Randomized crossover trial	PAC HEPA filter vs sham mode for 14 d	Inflammatory and thrombosis biomarkers	PM2.5 reduced by 60% (60 to 24 μg/m3)	No change in lung function, 12-h BP, HRV, plasma biomarkers
IL-8 decreased only in COPD
4. Dong et al73 Beijing, China.
(n=44) 2019	School children during class time with mean age of 12.4 y	Randomized, double-blind crossover study	PAC Ionization purifier for 5 d (10 h/d)	FEV1 FeNO HRV BP, ECG ST changes	PM2.5 reduced by 44% (72.5 vs 40.8 μg/m3)	FEV1 increased
FeNO, SDNN decreased
No change in BP
5.Weichenthal et al76
Manitoba, Canada
(n=37)
2013	Children and adults aged 11–64 living in First Nations reserve	Randomized, double-blind, crossover	PAC Electrostatic filter (non-HEPA) vs sham for 7 d	Spirometry FEV1, BP, RHI	PM2.5 concentrations were reduced by 52% (42.5 vs 22 μg/m3)	FEV1 increased (β 170 [95% CI, 22–320 mL])
SBP decreased by 7.9 (–17 to 0.82) and
DBP by 4.5 (–11 to 2.4), P=NS
No change in RHI
6. Brugge et al79
Boston and Chelsea, MA. (n=26) 2017	Puerto Rican residents in Boston (USA). (>50% diabetic, 1/3 with prior heart disease).	
Randomized, double-blind, crossover	PAC HEPA filter for 21 d	hsCRP IL-6 TNF-RII	Median PNC was 50%–85% lower vs sham filtration	No change in IL-6, CRP, or TNF-RII
7. Karottiki et al83 Copenhagen, Denmark. (n = 48)
2013	Adults (51–81 y) living within 350 m of major roads	Randomized, double-blind, crossover	PAC Electrostatic precipitator (AHU H11) vs sham for 7 d	BP, RHI, Spirometry, inflammatory biomarkers	PM2.5 concentrations were reduced by 46% (8.0 vs 4.3 μg/m3) but effect highly variable	No change in BP (0 mm Hg difference between sham and HEPA). No change in RHI, inflammatory markers
No change in RHI, but post hoc analysis revealed a correlation between reduction in PM and increase in RHI
8. Padro-Martinez et al84
Somerville, MA. (n=20) 2015 (n=20)	Adults living near highway	Randomized, double-blind, crossover	Window-mounted HEPA filter vs sham for 21 d	BP, hsCRP, IL-6, TNF-RII, fibrinogen	Particle number concentration decreased by 21% to 68%	No change in BP
No change in hsCRP, fibrinogen, and TNF-RII in response to filtration. IL-6 levels increased in HEPA group
9. Chuang et al85 Taipei, Taiwan.(n=200)
2017	Nonsmokers	Randomized, controlled, crossover	HEPA air conditioner filter vs false filter for 12 mo	BP
hsCRP
8-OHdG
Fibrinogen	PM2.5 reduced by 40% (21.4 vs 12.8 μg/m3)	Decrease of 2%–4% in SBP, DBP with HEPA
Decrease in 8-OHdG. No change in fibrinogen
10. Bräuner et al86 Copenhagen, Denmark. (n=41) 2008	Nonsmoking older adults (60–75 y), living near major roads	Randomized, double-blind, crossover	PAC
HEPA filter vs sham for 48 h	RHI
Inflammatory and thrombotic biomarkers	PM2.5 concentrations reduced by 62% (12.6 vs 4.7 μg/m3)	RHI increased 8.1% (95% CI, 0.4–16.3%)
No change in inflammatory/thrombotic biomarkers
11. Allen et al87
British Columbia, Canada (n=45)
2011	Healthy adults aged 20–63 y	Randomized,
single-blind, crossover	PAC
HEPA filter vs sham for 7 d	RHI
Inflammatory and lipid peroxidation biomarkers	PM2.5 concentrations reduced by 60% (11.2 vs 4.6 μg/m3)	RHI increased by 9.4% (95% CI, 0.9–18%)
CRP decreased by 32.6% (4.4%–60.9%)
12. Kajbafzadeh et al88
Vancouver, Canada. (n=83) 2015	Residents in wood smoke- or traffic-impacted areas 44±13 y	Randomized, single-blind, crossover	PAC
HEPA filter vs placebo filter for 7 d	RHI Inflammatory markers	PM2.5 reduced by 40% (7.1 vs 4.3 μg/m3)	No change in RHI or inflammatory markers
13. Morishita et al74 RAPIDS
Detroit, MI (n=40)
2018	Nonsmokers	Randomized, double-blind, crossover	PAC
HEPA filter (low, high efficiency) vs sham for 3 days with 7-d wash	BP
Aortic Hemodynamics PWV
Heart rate variability	Mean personal PM2.5 reduced by 53% by high-efficiency HEPA vs sham	HEPA filter decreased SBP by 3.2 (95% CI, −6.1 to −0.2 mm Hg) and DBP by 1.5 mm Hg (95% CI, −3.3 to 0.2 mm Hg). No difference between high/low efficiency filters. No change in secondary end points of aortic hemodynamics and HRV indices
14. Cui et al89
Shanghai, China.
(n=70)
2018	Nonsmoking college students 19–26 y	Randomized, double-blind, crossover	PAC
HEPA air filtration vs sham for 13 h (single session)	Lung function
BP
vWF	PM2.5 decreased by 70% (33.2 vs 10.0 μg/m3)	Air filtration reduced airway resistance indices without changes in FEV1 FVC.
vWF decreased
BP indicates blood pressure; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CVD, cardiovascular disease; DBP, diastolic blood pressure; FeNO, forced exhaled nitric oxide; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 second; FVC, forced vital capacity; HEPA, High Efficiency Particulate Arrestance; HRV, heart rate variability; hsCRP, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein; IL-6, interleukin-6; IL-8, interleukin-8; MCP-1, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1; PAC, portable air cleaner; PM2.5, fine particulate matter, defined as particles <2.5 μm in diameter; PNC, particle number concentration; RHI, reactive hyperemia index; SBP, systolic blood pressure; SDNN, standard deviation of normal-to-normal interval; 8-OHdG, 8-hydroxy-2′-deoxyguanosine; TNF-RII, tumor necrosis factor receptor II; and vWF, von Willebrand factor.

High-Efficiency Home Air Filtration Systems
Central HVAC units with inbuilt filters can be an effective means for particle removal in residential indoor environments. Factors such as CADRs, operation times, indoor air volumes, filters, and building air exchange rates are all important considerations that could impact the extent to which these systems are able to reduce indoor particle concentrations. The primary metric of filtration efficiency is dependent on the particle size, and therefore is specific for a specific particle definition (eg, PM2.5). The most common air filter efficiency test standards in the United States are the ASHRAE Standard 52.2 to 2017 that reports the minimum efficiency reporting value. ISO16890 is a new global standard and divides air filters into 4 size-fractionated groups (ISOePM1, ISOePM2.5, ISOePM0.1, and ISOCourse). HEPA filters are not usually incorporated in residential HVAC systems because of the need for professional modification (eg, because of pressure drops and differentials that would be detrimental to common household systems). Reported efficacy involves testing a filter in a laboratory under a specific set of ideal conditions, and thus may not represent installed efficiency, given real-world conditions that may impact performance.90

Efficiency is often temporally dynamic, with some filters improving in efficiency as they load with particles and others declining, in particular, as they age. Equally important to efficiency is the amount of air that goes through an ISOcoarse filter, because many forced-air residential HVAC systems cycle on and off to meet conditioning needs, with air flowing through the filter <20% of the time. For these reasons, medium-efficiency air filters (minimum efficiency reporting value 7–13), if installed and used properly, can be as effective as HEPA filters in reducing indoor particle levels.69 Filters with the same ratings but from different manufacturers may also differ in their filtration efficiencies in reducing PM2.5 and UFP.91 General best practices for central filtration include selecting a high-efficiency filter, changing the filter at the manufacturer’s recommended schedule (and even more frequently if used in high-concentration environments and for longer than average duty cycles), making sure that the filter slot is sealed and gasketed to eliminate bypass, and running the fan frequently in the system.69

There are research approaches to verifying filter effectiveness in a given building, but no current standards. Ultimately the product of efficiency and time-averaged flow, once normalized with the building volume, provides a loss rate for particles attributable to the filter. For a central filter to be effective, this loss rate has to be competitive with ventilation and deposition.69 Loss rates attributable to ventilation vary with building age, construction, and operational factors (ie, open windows) and deposition is generally very small for 0.1- to 0.3-μm particles, but increases for both smaller and larger particles. There are presently no clear studies demonstrating the health benefits of filters in forced-air systems in residences. Fisk et al92 have estimated their potential benefits during wildfires in a modeling analysis and found that they are likely to be less effective than using other methods such as PACs.

Personal Air-Purifying Respirators
An air-purifying respirator is a personal protective device that covers the nose and mouth and is used to reduce inhalation of PM2.5 and other particles depending on their rating efficiency (N95 or N99 removes >95% or 99% of inhaled particles at 0.3 μm in size). A key determinant of protection with N95 filters is their fit and use frequency. Improper fit may vastly degrade their efficacy. Some more expensive respirators may include a valve or microventilator fan to prevent the feeling of warmth or pressure. Relative humidity, previous loading, and respiration rates may influence respirator mask adherence and performance.

Small studies on N95 respirator usage under ambient PM2.5 exposure conditions over a few hours have shown that they may be able to reduce systolic BP and improve HRV parameters over a short period (Table 3). In 2 open label randomized crossover trials of scripted walks wearing a highly efficient N95 respirator or no protection under high levels of ambient air pollution in Beijing, China, the use of N95 respirators reduced BP. In the first trial involving healthy volunteers, a 48-hour face mask intervention reduced systolic BP by 7 mm Hg during the 2-hour walk and increased HRV over 24 hours.98 In the second much larger trial involving 98 patients with coronary artery disease, wearing an N95 respirator as much as possible for 48 hours decreased mean arterial BP by 3 mm Hg while walking (but not for the full 24-hour period) but also reduced maximal ST depression and increased HRV.93 In a trial of young adults in Shanghai, wearing an N95 respirator for 48 hours was associated with a 2.7 mm Hg decrease in 24-hour ambulatory systolic BP and an increase of HRV parameters.96 A shorter trial of an N95 respirator for 2 hours during peak traffic resulted in reductions in exhaled nitric oxide, interleukin-1α, interleukin-1β, and interleukin-6 in exhaled breath condensate, but without differences in endothelial function or oxidative stress measures.97

Table 3. Trials Using Face Masks or Respirators

Face mask or respirator use
Author, location	Design and intervention	Exposure and efficacy of intervention	Results on cardiopulmonary surrogate
Langrish et al 88
Beijing, China n=15	N95 respirator (3M Dust Respirator, model 8812)
Open-label crossover randomized controlled trial
N95 respirator worn as much as possible for 48 h and during scripted near-roadway 2-h walk
End point: BP and HRV	PM2.5 levels lower with N95 respirator used in study (86 vs140 mg/m3). No change in particle numbers	SBP lower (114±10 vs 121±11 mm Hg, P<0.01) when subjects wore N95 during a 2-h scripted walk. HRV measures increased (SDNN 65.6±11.5 vs 61.2±11.4 ms, P<0.05; LF power 919±352 vs 816±340 ms2, P<0.05) with N95 use
Langrish et al 93
Beijing, China n=98	N95 respirator (3M Dust Respirator, model 8812) worn as much as possible for 48 h and during scripted near-roadway 2-h walk
Open randomized crossover trial in patients with coronary heart disease
End point: BP, Holter ST depression, and HRV	Estimated exposure with respirator (assuming 97% efficiency) reduced from 89 μg/m3 and 43 900 particles/cm3 to 2 μg/m3 and 1200 particles/cm3, respectively	N95 reduced maximal ST-segment depression over 24-h period. Mean arterial pressure lower (93±10 vs 96±10 mm Hg, P=0.03) during a 2-h scripted walk and HRV measures increased (HF power: 54 vs 40 ms2, P=0.005; RMSSD: 16.7 vs 14.8 ms, P=0.007)
Laumbach et al94
New Jersey n=21	Powered air purifier with HEPA Filter
Single blinded randomized, crossover trial in morning rush hour traffic to air purifier with HEPA/sham
End point: breath MDA and nitrate/nitrite	Particle number reduced by 99.99% in comparison with unfiltered rides
Reduction in PM2.5 with HEPA smaller magnitude (9.1±4.8 vs 1.4±0.6 μg/m3)	Mean exhaled breath nitrites and sum of nitrate+nitrite lower with respirator than with unfiltered rides. Trend toward lower exhaled breath MDA
Yang et al95
Beijing, China n=20	N95 (3M, 9002 V), headphone (QuietComfort 25 Bose Inc), both or none for 4 h for 5 d with 2-wk washout
Open label randomized crossover study of college students in underground subway	No differences in ambient noise or PM2.5 between groups. Exposure reductions to noise, PM2.5 not reported	No change in BP. Most HRV parameters (HF, LF/HF, SDNN) improved with noise or air pollution reduction or both with no difference between groups. Increase of 4.4% in TP and decrease of 0.7 heart rate in headphone vs N95
Morishita et al78
Ann Arbor, MI n=40	N95 respirator (Dettol SiTi shieldProtect)
Open label randomized crossover study of healthy subjects to scripted near-roadway exposures (2 h/d for 4 d) with/without N95 respirator	PM2.5 (9.3±7.7 μg/m3), BC (1.3±0.6 μg/m3), particle number (8375±4930 particles/cm3) and noise (69.2±4.2 dB) were higher near roadway (P<0.01)	Aortic hemodynamic parameters trended worse while near roadway (P<0.15 vs examination room) and trended toward improvements with N95 (P<0.15 vs no use), whereas other outcomes remained unaffected
Shi et al96
Shanghai, China. n=24	N95 respirator
Open label crossover trial of N95 filter or no filter for 48 h. Ambulatory BP and HRV measured during the second 24-h period	During the study, ambient PM2.5 was 74.2 μg/m3	Wearing respirators was associated with a decrease of 2.7 mm Hg [95% CI, 0.1–5.2 mm Hg] in 24-h SBP and improvements in several HRV parameters
Guan et al97
Beijing, China. n=15	N95 respirator
Randomized crossover trial of healthy young adults walking and wearing N95 vs sham for 2 h on busy roadway	PM2.5 levels: 246.1 μg/m3 and 258.0 μg/m3 in 2 groups. N95 removed 48%–75% of particles between 5.6 and 560 nm in diameter	Exhaled NO, IL-1α, IL-1β, and IL-6 in exhaled breath condensate increased significantly in all subjects; increases while wearing authentic N95 were significantly lower than during sham. No significant between-group difference was evident in endothelial function or MDA measures
BC indicates black carbon; BP, blood pressure; HEPA, High Efficiency Particulate Arrestance; HF, high frequency; HRV, heart rate variability; IL-1α, interleukin-1α; IL-1β, interleukin-1β; IL-6, interleukin-6; LF, low frequency; MDA, malondialdehyde; NO, nitric oxide; PM2.5, fine particulate matter, defined as particles <2.5 μm in diameter; RMSSD, root mean square of the mean differences in successive normal-to-normal intervals; SBP, systolic blood pressure; SDNN, standard deviation of normal-to-normal interval; and TP, total power.

There have been 2 studies from the United States under relatively low ambient PM2.5 levels involving exposure to traffic air pollution and an N95 respirator intervention. In New Jersey (PM2.5 mean ≈9 μg/m3) face mask use among 21 healthy adults who took a 1.5-hour ride in a vehicle in morning rush hour traffic on the New Jersey turnpike led to nonstatistically significant decreases in exhaled breath nitrites.94 BP was not an end point. In Ann Arbor, MI, passive near-highway exposure for 2 hours in healthy volunteers without a respirator was associated with worse aortic hemodynamics, which trended toward improvement with respirator use.99 Higher near-roadway particle concentration and black carbon exposures were associated with increases in aortic augmentation pressures (P<0.05) and trends toward lower reactive hyperemia index (P<0.2). However, N95 respirator usage did not mitigate these adverse responses, suggesting perhaps that the smallest ultrafine particles may not be filtered as effectively as those in the fine particle range (>100 nm) or the impact may be attributable to gaseous pollutants.100 Louder roadway noise was also associated with worsened aortic hemodynamics.

In the only trial comparing exposure mitigation with both noise and air pollution, individual reduction of air pollution or noise with a respirator or noise-canceling headphones, respectively, did not alter BP. HRV measures, however, were variably improved with either intervention. Combined intervention did not appear to have additive effects.95 Taken together, these studies suggest that, at least under conditions of high ambient exposures, there could be meaningful reductions in BP in response to an N95 respirator intervention. Some concerns over potential adverse cardiopulmonary stress induced by wearing a respirator thereby mitigating health benefits have been raised. However, there is no evidence that wearing a respirator for short durations adversely impacts health parameters such as BP, heart rate, or aortic hemodynamics.99

Face masks (typically made of gauze, cotton, or cloth) and procedural masks (eg, surgical masks) are more widely available, but are not uniformly effective in filtering PM2.5. They do not form a tight facial seal, thus allowing the inhalation of a variable level of air pollutants. They are neither designed nor certified as personal protection equipment. In a simulated comparative study using mannequins, disposable surgical masks were more effective than cloth masks, but respirators were the most effective overall in reducing particulate exposure. Cloth mask performance was unpredictable, in part, because of the inability to seal the face.101 In a comparative study with 3 different categories of masks (bandana, biker, and surgical), surgical masks significantly decreased PM2.5 in comparison with the others, but their performance was highly variable.102

In summary, the current level of evidence demonstrates that wearing validated N95 respirators over a few hours to days in supervised experiments may improve surrogate markers of cardiovascular risk in environments with high PM2.5 levels, although the evidence is not consistent across studies and no evidence exists regarding their impact on cardiovascular events. Nonetheless, their brief use during extremely poor PM2.5 air quality events might be beneficial if worn appropriately. It is logical to question if surgical masks should be recommended for usage if N95 respirators are not available. On the one hand, some degree of protection against PM2.5 exposure, even if only incomplete (eg, 25%–75%), among many millions of people facing high levels of exposure might translate into significant public health benefits, considering the well-described dose-risk response. On the other hand, arguments have been made that these masks might engender a false sense of security, thereby worsening overall exposure. Although they can reduce the inhalation of PM2.5 by a variable degree, any health benefits of wearing less cumbersome face masks (eg, surgical style) have yet to be shown. At this point, there is insufficient evidence to support or proscribe against the use of simple face masks. The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic will likely lower barriers to societal acceptance of wearing an N95 respirator or facial masks in public.

Automobile Air filters and Air Conditioning
Approaches to reduce PM2.5 and UFP exposure during travel could be important in those who are susceptible, but also in those spending large amounts of time in transportation microenvironments. It is important to acknowledge that exposure to traffic may vary considerably across individuals, and some of these measures may not be relevant to all. Furthermore, those who live near major roadways could be more consistently and chronically exposed to traffic-related air pollution, and thus could be more vulnerable than the average commuter during rush hour traffic. Closing windows, air conditioning, and cabin air filters represents 3 approaches that could be used together or individually to reduce exposures. Closing windows plus using cabin air filters lowered in-cabin PM2.5 levels by 37% and was associated with reduced oxidative stress markers that correlated with in-cabin PM2.5 concentrations.103 There is evidence that high-efficiency cabin filters are more effective in reducing PM2.5 levels within the cabin than manufacturer-installed air filters.104,105 At least in 1 study in rush hour traffic, turning on air conditioning with recirculated air was more effective in improving HRV than air conditioning without recirculation or no air conditioning.106Table 4 provides a summary of considerations in the selection of personalized interventions for susceptible individuals.

Behavioral Strategies
Simple strategies implemented into one’s lifestyle can help limit air pollution exposure (Table 4). Some of these practical strategies are general and may not necessarily reduce exposures to PM2.5, which is considered a regional pollutant. However, they may exert health benefits through their impact on UFPs and gaseous copollutants (in particular, ozone), which have also been associated with health risk.

Table 4. Considerations in the Selection of Personalized Intervention

Intervention	Personal protection type	Use considerations

PACs	Electronic air cleaners
Electrostatic precipitator	• Electrostatic precipitators and electronic air filters that contain ionizers can produce ozone and should be avoided.
• Use of PAC with HEPA filters can reduce indoor PM2.5 exposures and are preferred. A PAC with Clean Air Delivery Rate to meet room size specifications should be used.
• Consider use of indoor PACs with HEPA filters, especially in vulnerable and high-risk populations living in heavily polluted location or during heavy air pollution episode. If PACs cannot cover home, create a clean sleeping room.
• Replace HEPA filters periodically when their capacity is reached (saturated with particles).
• The California Air Resources Board has information on selecting portable and central air cleaners, including information on choosing the correct size for room(s). http://www.arb.ca.gov/research/indoor/acdsumm.pdf. EPA provides detailed technical information on air cleaners. http://www.epa.gov/indoor-air-quality-iaq/guide-air-cleaners-home
Face masks* and respirators†	N95/N99 respirators	• Certified N95/N99 respirators with or without exhalation valves are validated as personal protection devices and can markedly reduce PM2.5 when worn properly (eg, tight facial seal).107,108
• Consider use of respirators outdoors when air pollution levels are high (heavily polluted city, air pollution event, wildfire) and for susceptible or high-risk individuals who visit/travel to locales with high levels of air pollution.
HVAC	Mechanical in-duct air filter
Ventilation air conditioning	• Consider properly installed MERV 7–13 (or equivalent) filter and change filters frequently with high levels of indoor or ambient PM2.5.• Consider closing windows to limit indoor penetration of outdoor PM2.5 during heavy pollution.
• Use filters with a high MERV and run furnace/air conditioning fan continuously during high pollution.
Automobiles	Air conditioning and cabin air filters	• Consider closing windows and use air conditioning in polluted areas (such as freeways, rush-hour traffic, near diesel trucks). Recirculation mode can reduce exposures to ambient particles.
• Consider using the highest efficiency air filter available for the cabin and frequent changes in areas with high levels of chronic PM2.5 exposure.
EPA indicates US Environmental Protection Agency; HEPA, High Efficiency Particulate Arrestance; HVAC, heating ventilation and air conditioning; MERV, minimum efficiency reporting value; PAC, portable air cleaner; and PM2.5, fine particulate matter, defined as particles <2.5 μm in diameter.

* Cloth or procedural (eg, surgical masks) are an inferior consideration, whose use may induce a false sense of health protection and does not reliably reduce PM2.5 exposures. They are neither designed nor recommended for protection against air pollutants, including PM2.5. If personal respirators are not a viable option, surgical masks with attention to tight facial/oronasal seal may be considered. They need to be changed frequently in conditions of high ambient levels of PM2.5.

† List of certified air cleaning devices: http://www.arb.ca.gov/research/indoor/aircleaners/certified.htm109

Air Pollution Avoidance
Such strategies include avoidance of peak pollution times and geographic areas through changes in commute and may be more relevant to traffic-related air pollution. Traffic-related exposures impact a large population, with 11% of US residents, or >30 million people, living within 100 meters of a ≥4 lane highway.110 Avoidance of proximity, including exercise within 400 meters of highways or major arterial roads, could potentially reduce exposure to traffic-derived UFP and other air pollutants, especially in high-risk individuals.111–115 UFP concentrations and composition are highly spatially variable with steep concentration gradients that taper off away from the source.116 Air pollution alerts built into GPS programs can help guide drivers through less polluted routes and avert exposure to traffic-related UFPs, although there is currently no evidence that this can modify health outcomes.

Staying Indoors and Closing Windows
The evidence that staying indoors reduces PM2.5 exposure from outdoor ambient sources (and thereby potentially driving health benefit) is a function of outdoor PM2.5 levels, how much time is spent indoors, and last, outdoor-indoor penetration determined principally by building ventilation and air leakage. Closing windows in conjunction with the use of air conditioning can lead to substantial reductions in outdoor PM2.5 penetration. Closing windows in an environment with high outdoor-indoor permeation has been shown to be sufficient in attenuating increase in plasma C-reactive protein and fibrinogen and decrease in HRV seen with open windows. No further modification was noted with additional air conditioning with closed windows.117 Consistent effect modification on indoor PM2.5 and total volatile organic compounds according to window status (open versus closed) and air conditioner usage (on versus off) was observed.117 A recommendation of staying indoors by environmental protection agencies in a number of countries to reduce exposure on high air pollution days, in the absence of additional measures to reduce infiltration of ambient PM2.5, may not be sufficient.13 Staying indoors with closed windows also has the potential for competing risk of exposure to high temperatures and a variety of primary and secondary air pollutants from indoor sources. However, despite these caveats, and with the appropriate measures, staying indoors may be impactful in reducing exposure in environments with high ambient PM2.5.

Modification of Exercise and Activity
An important practical question is whether one needs to curtail activity, especially outdoor exercise, during episodes of PM2.5 air pollution and the amount of exercise that one needs to partake in, to reduce the adverse health effects of PM2.5. A variety of health impact modeling studies have attempted to address this question, with imputation of published dose-response relationships of exercise, and the adverse effects of ambient PM2.5 air pollution.118,119 In general, these modeling studies have demonstrated that the benefits of aerobic exercise nearly always exceed the risk of air pollution exposure across a range of concentrations and for long durations of exercise for healthy individuals. In 1 study, real exercise on a treadmill was used to calculate minute ventilation and impute inhaled dose using publicly reported annual mean PM2.5 concentrations for the world’s cleanest and dirtiest cities.119 Using nonlinear dose-response function curves for exercise-induced health benefits and PM2.5-mediated increase in mortality, respectively, competing risk/benefits were estimated. Although exercise in the cleanest cities improved health benefits throughout 90 minutes of exercise, no further health benefits were noted after 15 minutes of exercise in the dirtiest cities (annual averages >100 μg/m3) with mortality risks of exposure exceeding exercise benefit after 75 minutes of aerobic activity.119 Although interesting, these data should be cautiously interpreted given multiple assumptions and the fact that these may not be applicable to other populations and, in particular, susceptible subgroups.

The health benefits of policies that promote active travel versus the trade-offs of increased exposures to traffic-related air pollution and increased injuries have been examined.120–124 In general, these analyses have found that the beneficial effects of increased activity easily offset the combined potential mortality risk of increased air pollution exposure and traffic accidents, in all but the most polluted cities in the world. In a randomized crossover study, healthy volunteers, patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or ischemic heart disease (defined as Global Initiative for Obstructive Lung Disease stage 2 disease with a forced expiratory volume in 1 second to forced vital capacity ratio of <0.7 and a forced expiratory volume in 1 second of ≤80% or angiographic evidence of ischemic heart disease) who walked along a busy traffic-heavy commercial street in London (Oxford Street) were compared with those who took a similar walk in a wooded area (Hyde Park). In all participants, walking in a wooded urban park was associated with a significant reduction in pulse wave velocity and augmentation index, and improvements in lung function parameters (increased forced vital capacity and forced expiratory volume in 1 second). In contrast, walking on a crowded street was associated with an attenuation of this decrease in pulse wave velocity and augmentation index in all subjects. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease subjects reported significantly higher scores on cough, sputum, and shortness of breath in comparison with healthy volunteers.125 There was no evidence of substantial differential responsivity in patients with ischemic heart disease and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in comparison with healthy subjects for most other objective measures, with the exception of BP, which increased in patients with ischemic heart disease, following the walk on the commercial street. In a sensitivity analysis, participants with ischemic heart disease who did not use their regular oral medications had significantly attenuated reductions in pulse wave velocity and augmentation index after a walk on a commercial street versus those that did.125

Other larger-scale epidemiological studies support the concept that the long-term health benefits of routine exercise or physical activity are not mitigated by chronically high levels of outdoor ambient air pollution.126,127 Based on current evidence, guiding healthy people to avoid outdoor activity in areas with high PM2.5 pollution has the potential to produce greater harm than benefit, given the low absolute risk for cardiovascular or respiratory events. However, advising patients with preestablisheed cardiovascular disease to continue to remain >400 meters away from major roadways to avoid exposure to UFP and gaseous copollutants if possible, is a reasonable measure, despite the lack of strong additional evidentiary support from well-controlled studies demonstrating health benefits.

Pharmacotherapy
The effect of several dietary supplements has been reviewed previously.128 Given the central role of oxidative stress and mechanisms, such as increased thrombogenicity and endothelial dysfunction, as initiating pathways of PM2.5 air pollution–mediated cardiovascular risk, many studies have focused on antioxidant supplementation. Vitamin C supplementation has been shown to prevent acute lung effects induced by NO2 and ozone exposure and has been shown to modify the relationship between PM10 and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease/asthma hospitalizations.129–131 In a study of coal power-plant workers in Brazil, 6 months of vitamins C and E supplementation normalized markers of oxidative stress.132 In a randomized trial in Detroit (Michigan), one-time vitamin C supplementation did not attenuate acute BP effects of concentrated PM2.5 exposure.133 At least 1 study has shown that antioxidant supplementation increased vasoconstriction in response to diesel-exhaust inhalation.134

There is presently no evidence for the protective effects of commonly used primary or secondary prevention treatments on hard cardiovascular events in relation to air pollution levels. Statins have been shown in panel studies to decrease surrogates such as C-reactive protein.128 In a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial of healthy young adults in China, fish-oil supplementation (1.5 g of n-3 fatty acids with eicosapentaenoic acid/docosahexaenoic acid content of 900 and 600 mg, respectively) attenuated association between increased blood markers of inflammation, coagulation, endothelial function, neuroendocrine stress response, and PM2.5 exposure.135 A recent study of more than half a million individuals in the United States followed for 17 years showed that a Mediterranean diet was associated with attenuation of the association between PM2.5 and cardiovascular events.136 In summary, neither over-the-counter drugs nor medications can be recommended to protect against air pollution–mediated adverse health effects at this time. However, the use of medications for primary and secondary prevention of coronary heart disease should be encouraged if indicated for other reasons.

Gaps in Current Knowledge IN PERSONALIZED APPROACHES TO AVERT AIR POLLUTION EXPOSURE
Individualized reduction in exposure to PM2.5 offers a major opportunity for improving global health. Although bodies such as the AHA, European Society of Cardiology, and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention formally recognize PM2.5 as an independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease, the inclusion of air pollution in prevention guidelines and risk-scoring approaches has not occurred.14,65,137 In this regard, the lack of randomized controlled clinical trials for personal protection is a major limitation. Intervention trials would be of greatest relevance in heavily polluted countries, but their efficacy in exposure hotspots and in response to calamities such as wildfires and dust storms should not be underestimated. A better understanding of susceptible populations in order to design impactful trials, with the intention of directing such measures toward these subgroups, are warranted to optimally protect public health. Air pollutants often coexist with other environmental pollutants and exposures (exposome) as part of a complex network of factors.138 The potentially additive or synergistic health risks posed by multiple exposures are yet to be fully understood. The current transformation of nonregulatory portable monitoring technologies can help facilitate better understanding of spatial and temporal relationships of cardiovascular health outcomes to exposure. The cardiovascular health relevance of these exposure assessments, however, needs to be better understood before these measurements can be used to protect public health. Ultimately, the integration of environmental exposures to personalized medicine approaches (with air pollution providing a prototypical environmental exposure) can provide a significant opportunity to link the external environment with cardiovascular health.

Disclosures
Writing Group Disclosures

Writing group member	Employment	Research grant	Other research support	Speakers’ bureau/honoraria	Expert witness	Ownership interest	Consultant/advisory board	Other
Sanjay Rajagopalan	Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Case Cardiovascular Research Institute, University Hospitals, Harrington Heart and Vascular Institute	None	None	None	None	None	None	None
Robert D. Brook	Wayne State University	None	None	None	None	None	None	None
Aruni Bhatnagar	University of Louisville	NIH (PI) †	None	None	None	None	None	None
Deepak L. Bhatt	Brigham and Women’s Hospital Heart and Vascular Center Harvard Medical School	See below	See below	None	None	None	See below	None
Michael Brauer	University of British Columbia School of Population and Public Health (Canada)	None	None	None	None	None	None	None
Jeffrey R. Brook	The University of Toronto Dalla Lana School of Public Health (Canada)	None	None	None	None	None	None	None
Wei Huang	Peking University School of Public Health (China)	None	None	None	None	None	None	None
Thomas Münzel	University Medical Center Mainz Center for Cardiology (Germany)	None	None	None	None	None	None	None
David Newby	University of Edinburgh (United Kingdom)	British Heart Foundation (has held grants to conduct research into the cardiovascular effects of air pollution)†	None	None	None	None	None	None
Jeffrey Siegel	University of Toronto (Canada)	None	None	None	None	None	None	None
Other Research: Dr Deepak L. Bhatt discloses the following relationships: Advisory Board: Cardax, CellProthera, Cereno Scientific, Elsevier Practice Update Cardiology, Level Ex, Medscape Cardiology, PhaseBio, PLx Pharma, Regado Biosciences (unpaid); Board of Directors: Boston VA Research Institute, Society of Cardiovascular Patient Care, TobeSoft; Chair: American Heart Association Quality Oversight Committee; Data Monitoring Committees: Baim Institute for Clinical Research (formerly Harvard Clinical Research Institute, for the PORTICO trial, funded by St. Jude Medical, now Abbott), Cleveland Clinic (including for the ExCEED trial, funded by Edwards), Contego Medical (Chair PERFORMANCE 2), Duke Clinical Research Institute, Mayo Clinic, Mount Sinai School of Medicine (for the ENVISAGE trial, funded by Daiichi Sankyo), Population Health Research Institute; Honoraria: American College of Cardiology (Senior Associate Editor, Clinical Trials and News, ACC.org; Vice-Chair, ACC Accreditation Committee), Baim Institute for Clinical Research (formerly Harvard Clinical Research Institute; RE-DUAL PCI clinical trial steering committee funded by Boehringer Ingelheim; AEGIS-II executive committee funded by CSL Behring), Belvoir Publications (Editor in Chief, Harvard Heart Letter), Duke Clinical Research Institute (clinical trial steering committees, including for the PRONOUNCE trial, funded by Ferring Pharmaceuticals), HMP Global (Editor in Chief, Journal of Invasive Cardiology), Journal of the American College of Cardiology (Guest Editor; Associate Editor), K2P (Co-Chair, interdisciplinary curriculum), Medtelligence/ReachMD (CME steering committees), Level Ex, MJH Life Sciences, Population Health Research Institute (for the COMPASS operations committee, publications committee, steering committee, and USA national coleader, funded by Bayer), Slack Publications (Chief Medical Editor, Cardiology Today’s Intervention), Society of Cardiovascular Patient Care (Secretary/Treasurer), WebMD (CME steering committees); Other: Clinical Cardiology (Deputy Editor), NCDR-ACTION Registry Steering Committee (Chair), VA CART Research and Publications Committee (Chair); Research Funding: Abbott, Afimmune, Amarin, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Cardax, Chiesi, CSL Behring, Eisai, Ethicon, Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Forest Laboratories, Fractyl, Idorsia, Ironwood, Ischemix, Lexicon, Lilly, Medtronic, Pfizer, PhaseBio, PLx Pharma, Regeneron, Roche, Sanofi Aventis, Synaptic, The Medicines Company;† Royalties: Elsevier (Editor, Cardiovascular Intervention: A Companion to Braunwald’s Heart Disease); Site Co-Investigator: Biotronik, Boston Scientific, CSI, St. Jude Medical (now Abbott), Svelte; Trustee: American College of Cardiology; Unfunded Research: FlowCo, Merck, Novo Nordisk, Takeda.

† This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.

* Modest.

† Significant.

Reviewer Disclosures

Reviewer	Employment	Research grant	Other research support	Speakers’ bureau/honoraria	Expert witness	Ownership interest	Consultant/advisory board	Other
John R. Balmes	UCSF	None	None	None	None	None	None	California Air Resources Board (ePhysician Member of this component agency of Cal/EPA)†
Melissa S. Burroughs-Peña	Stanford Health Care	None	None	None	None	None	None	None
Kateryna B. Fuks	Federal Agency for Radiation Protection (Germany)	None	None	None	None	None	None	None
Miranda R. Jones	Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health	None	None	None	None	None	None	None
Murray A. Mittleman	Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health	NIH (Grants from NHLBI, NINDS, NIGMS)†; PCORI†; W. K. Kellogg Foundation*; National Institute of Justice*	None	None	None	None	None	None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.

* Modest.

† Significant.

Footnotes
https://www.ahajournals.org/journal/circ

The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a result of an outside relationship or a personal, professional, or business interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifically, all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest.

This statement was approved by the American Heart Association Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on August 23, 2020 and the American Heart Association Executive Committee on September 16, 2020. A copy of the document is available at https://professional.heart.org/statements by using either “Search for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse by Topic” area. To purchase additional reprints, call 215-356-2721 or email Meredith.Edelman@wolterskluwer.com.

The American Heart Association requests that this document be cited as follows: Rajagopalan S, Brauer M, Bhatnagar A, Bhatt DL, Brook JR, Huang W, Munzel T, Newby D, Siegel J, Brook RD; on behalf of the American Heart Association Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic Health; Council on Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis and Vascular Biology; Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; and Stroke Council. Personal-level protective actions against particulate matter air pollution exposure: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2020;142:e411–e431. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000931

The expert peer review of AHA-commissioned documents (eg, scientific statements, clinical practice guidelines, systematic reviews) is conducted by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and guidelines development, visit https://professional.heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & Statements” drop-down menu, then click “Publication Development.”

Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted without the express permission of the American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are located at https://www.heart.org/permissions. A link to the “Copyright Permissions Request Form” appears in the second paragraph (https://www.heart.org/en/about-us/statements-and-policies/copyright-request-form).

References
1.Landrigan PJ, Fuller R, Acosta NJR, Adeyi O, Arnold R, Basu NN, Baldé AB, Bertollini R, Bose-O’Reilly S, Boufford JI, et al. The Lancet Commission on pollution and health.Lancet. 2018; 391:462–512. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32345-0CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
2.Rajagopalan S, Al-Kindi SG, Brook RD. Air pollution and cardiovascular disease: JACC state-of-the-art review.J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018; 72:2054–2070. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.07.099CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
3.Burnett R, Chen H, Szyszkowicz M, Fann N, Hubbell B, Pope CA, Apte JS, Brauer M, Cohen A, Weichenthal S, et al. Global estimates of mortality associated with long-term exposure to outdoor fine particulate matter.Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. .2018; 115:9592–9597CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
4.Cohen AJ, Brauer M, Burnett R, Anderson HR, Frostad J, Estep K, Balakrishnan K, Brunekreef B, Dandona L, Dandona R, et al. Estimates and 25-year trends of the global burden of disease attributable to ambient air pollution: an analysis of data from the Global Burden of Diseases Study 2015.Lancet. 2017; 389:1907–1918. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)30505-6CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
5.Academy of Science of South Africa, Brazilian Academy of Sciences, German National Academy of Sciences Leopoldina, US National Academy of Medicine, and US National Academy of Sciences. Air pollution and health – a science-policy initiative.Ann Glob Health. 2019; 85:140. doi: 10.5334/aogh.2656CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
6.Brauer M, Amann M, Burnett RT, Cohen A, Dentener F, Ezzati M, Henderson SB, Krzyzanowski M, Martin RV, Van Dingenen R, et al. Exposure assessment for estimation of the global burden of disease attributable to outdoor air pollution.Environ Sci Technol. 2012; 46:652–660. doi: 10.1021/es2025752CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
7.Di Q, Wang Y, Zanobetti A, Wang Y, Koutrakis P, Choirat C, Dominici F, Schwartz JD. Air pollution and mortality in the Medicare population.N Engl J Med. 2017; 376:2513–2522. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1702747CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
8.Di Q, Dai L, Wang Y, Zanobetti A, Choirat C, Schwartz JD, Dominici F. Association of short-term exposure to air pollution with mortality in older adults.JAMA. 2017; 318:2446–2456. doi: 10.1001/jama.2017.17923CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
9.Pinault L, Tjepkema M, Crouse DL, Weichenthal S, van Donkelaar A, Martin RV, Brauer M, Chen H, Burnett RT. Risk estimates of mortality attributed to low concentrations of ambient fine particulate matter in the Canadian community health survey cohort.Environ Health. 2016; 15:18. doi: 10.1186/s12940-016-0111-6CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
10.Pappin AJ, Christidis T, Pinault LL, Crouse DL, Brook JR, Erickson A, Hystad P, Li C, Martin RV, Meng J, et al. Examining the shape of the association between low levels of fine particulate matter and mortality across three cycles of the Canadian census health and environment cohort.Environ Health Perspect. 2019; 127:107008. doi: 10.1289/EHP5204CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
11.Zhang Q, Zheng Y, Tong D, Shao M, Wang S, Zhang Y, Xu X, Wang J, He H, Liu W, et al. Drivers of improved PM2.5 air quality in China from 2013 to 2017.Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019; 116:24463–24469. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1907956116CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
12.Bard RL, Ijaz MK, Zhang JJ, Li Y, Bai C, Yang Y, Garcia WD, Creek J, Brook RD. Interventions to reduce personal exposures to air pollution: a primer for health care providers.Glob Heart. 2019; 14:47–60. doi: 10.1016/j.gheart.2019.02.001CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
13.Laumbach R, Meng Q, Kipen H. What can individuals do to reduce personal health risks from air pollution?.J Thorac Dis. 2015; 7:96–107. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2014.12.21MedlineGoogle Scholar
14.Brook RD, Rajagopalan S, Pope CA, Brook JR, Bhatnagar A, Diez-Roux AV, Holguin F, Hong Y, Luepker RV, Mittleman MA, et al; on behalf of the American Heart Association Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, Council on the Kidney in Cardiovascular Disease, and Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity and Metabolism.. Particulate matter air pollution and cardiovascular disease: an update to the scientific statement from the American Heart Association.Circulation. 2010; 121:2331–2378. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e3181dbece1LinkGoogle Scholar
15.US Environmental Protection Agency. Integrated science assessment (ISA) for particulate matter (final report, 2019).Washington, DC: EPA; 2019. US EPA/600/R-19/188. https://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/isa/recordisplay.cfm?deid=347534Google Scholar
16.Baldauf RW, Devlin RB, Gehr P, Giannelli R, Hassett-Sipple B, Jung H, Martini G, McDonald J, Sacks JD, Walker K. Ultrafine particle metrics and research considerations: review of the 2015 UFP Workshop.Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2016; 13:1054. doi: 10.3390/ijerph13111054CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
17.Rivera Gil P, Oberdörster G, Elder A, Puntes V, Parak WJ. Correlating physico-chemical with toxicological properties of nanoparticles: the present and the future.ACS Nano. 2010; 4:5527–5531. doi: 10.1021/nn1025687CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
18.Hajat A, Hsia C, O’Neill MS. Socioeconomic disparities and air pollution exposure: a global review.Curr Environ Health Rep. 2015; 2:440–450. doi: 10.1007/s40572-015-0069-5CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
19.Havard S, Deguen S, Zmirou-Navier D, Schillinger C, Bard D. Traffic-related air pollution and socioeconomic status: a spatial autocorrelation study to assess environmental equity on a small-area scale.Epidemiology. 2009; 20:223–230. doi: 10.1097/EDE.0b013e31819464e1CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
20.Mitchell R, Popham F. Effect of exposure to natural environment on health inequalities: an observational population study.Lancet. 2008; 372:1655–1660. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61689-XCrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
21.Rajagopalan S, Brook RD. The indoor-outdoor air-pollution continuum and the burden of cardiovascular disease: an opportunity for improving global health.Glob Heart. 2012; 7:207–213. doi: 10.1016/j.gheart.2012.06.009CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
22.Kumar P, Morawska L, Birmili W, Paasonen P, Hu M, Kulmala M, Harrison RM, Norford L, Britter R. Ultrafine particles in cities.Environ Int. 2014; 66:1–10. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2014.01.013CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
23.Fisk WJ, Chan WR. Effectiveness and cost of reducing particle-related mortality with particle filtration.Indoor Air. 2017; 27:909–920. doi: 10.1111/ina.12371CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
24.McCracken JP, Wellenius GA, Bloomfield GS, Brook RD, Tolunay HE, Dockery DW, Rabadan-Diehl C, Checkley W, Rajagopalan S. Household air pollution from solid fuel use: evidence for links to CVD.Glob Heart. 2012; 7:223–234. doi: 10.1016/j.gheart.2012.06.010CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
25.Abatzoglou JT, Williams AP. Impact of anthropogenic climate change on wildfire across western US forests.Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016; 113:11770–11775. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1607171113CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
26.AghaKouchak A, Huning LS, Chiang F, Sadegh M, Vahedifard F, Mazdiyasni O, Moftakhari H, Mallakpour I. How do natural hazards cascade to cause disasters?.Nature. 2018; 561:458–460. doi: 10.1038/d41586-018-06783-6CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
27.Reid CE, Brauer M, Johnston FH, Jerrett M, Balmes JR, Elliott CT. Critical review of health impacts of wildfire smoke exposure.Environ Health Perspect. 2016; 124:1334–1343. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1409277CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
28.Wettstein ZS, Hoshiko S, Fahimi J, Harrison RJ, Cascio WE, Rappold AG. Cardiovascular and cerebrovascular emergency department visits associated with wildfire smoke exposure in California in 2015.J Am Heart Assoc. 2018; 7:e007492. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.117.007492LinkGoogle Scholar
29.DeFlorio-Barker S, Crooks J, Reyes J, Rappold AG. Cardiopulmonary effects of fine particulate matter exposure among older adults, during wildfire and non-wildfire periods, in the United States 2008–2010.Environ Health Perspect. 2019; 127:37006. doi: 10.1289/EHP3860CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
30.Kanatani KT, Okumura M, Tohno S, Adachi Y, Sato K, Nakayama T. Indoor particle counts during Asian dust events under everyday conditions at an apartment in Japan.Environ Health Prev Med. 2014; 19:81–88. doi: 10.1007/s12199-013-0356-4CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
31.Field RD, van der Werf GR, Fanin T, Fetzer EJ, Fuller R, Jethva H, Levy R, Livesey NJ, Luo M, Torres O, et al. Indonesian fire activity and smoke pollution in 2015 show persistent nonlinear sensitivity to El Niño-induced drought.Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016; 113:9204–9209CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
32.Vilcassim MJR, Thurston GD, Chen LC, Lim CC, Saunders E, Yao Y, Gordon T. Exposure to air pollution is associated with adverse cardiopulmonary health effects in international travellers.J Travel Med. 2019; 26:taz032. doi: 10.1093/jtm/taz032CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
33.Lin Y, Ramanathan G, Zhu Y, Yin F, Rea ND, Lu X, Tseng CH, Faull KF, Yoon AJ, Jerrett M, et al. Pro-oxidative and proinflammatory effects after traveling from Los Angeles to Beijing: a biomarker-based natural experiment.Circulation. 2019; 140:1995–2004. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.042054LinkGoogle Scholar
34.Münzel T, Sørensen M, Gori T, Schmidt FP, Rao X, Brook FR, Chen LC, Brook RD, Rajagopalan S. Environmental stressors and cardio-metabolic disease: part II-mechanistic insights.Eur Heart J. 2017; 38:557–564. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehw294MedlineGoogle Scholar
35.Münzel T, Gori T, Al-Kindi S, Deanfield J, Lelieveld J, Daiber A, Rajagopalan S. Effects of gaseous and solid constituents of air pollution on endothelial function.Eur Heart J. 2018; 39:3543–3550. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehy481CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
36.Cosselman KE, Navas-Acien A, Kaufman JD. Environmental factors in cardiovascular disease.Nat Rev Cardiol. 2015; 12:627–642. doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2015.152CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
37.Figueres C, Landrigan PJ, Fuller R. Tackling air pollution, climate change, and NCDs: time to pull together.Lancet. 2018; 392:1502–1503. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)32740-5CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
38.Münzel T, Sørensen M, Gori T, Schmidt FP, Rao X, Brook J, Chen LC, Brook RD, Rajagopalan S. Environmental stressors and cardio-metabolic disease: part I-epidemiologic evidence supporting a role for noise and air pollution and effects of mitigation strategies.Eur Heart J. 2017; 38:550–556. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehw269MedlineGoogle Scholar
39.Bowe B, Xie Y, Li T, Yan Y, Xian H, Al-Aly Z. The 2016 global and national burden of diabetes mellitus attributable to PM2.5 air pollution.Lancet Planet Health. 2018; 2:e301–e312. doi: 10.1016/S2542-5196(18)30140-2CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
40.Rao X, Zhong J, Brook RD, Rajagopalan S. Effect of particulate matter air pollution on cardiovascular oxidative stress pathways.Antioxid Redox Signal. 2018; 28:797–818. doi: 10.1089/ars.2017.7394CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
41.Miller MR, Raftis JB, Langrish JP, McLean SG, Samutrtai P, Connell SP, Wilson S, Vesey AT, Fokkens PHB, Boere AJF, et al. Inhaled nanoparticles accumulate at sites of vascular disease.ACS Nano. 2017; 11:4542–4552. doi: 10.1021/acsnano.6b08551CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
42.Cromar KR, Duncan BN, Bartonova A, Benedict K, Brauer M, Habre R, Hagler GSW, Haynes JA, Khan S, Kilaru V, et al. Air pollution monitoring for health research and patient care. An official American Thoracic Society Workshop Report.Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2019; 16:1207–1214. doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201906-477STCrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
43.Larkin A, Hystad P. Towards personal exposures: how technology is changing air pollution and health research.Curr Environ Health Rep. 2017; 4:463–471. doi: 10.1007/s40572-017-0163-yCrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
44.Woodall GM, Hoover MD, Williams R, Benedict K, Harper M, Soo JC, Jarabek AM, Stewart MJ, Brown JS, Hulla JE, et al. Interpreting mobile and handheld air sensor readings in relation to air quality standards and health effect reference values: tackling the challenges.Atmosphere (Basel). 2017; 8:182. doi: 10.3390/atmos8100182CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
45.AirNow. A Guide to Air Quality and Your Health.Accessed January 2020. https://www.airnow.gov/air-quality-and-health/Google Scholar
46.US Environmental Protection Agency. Air quality criteria for particulate matter (December 2016).2016. Accessed January 16, 2020. https://www.epa.gov/criteria-air-pollutants/naaqs-tableGoogle Scholar
47.Abelsohn A, Stieb DM. Health effects of outdoor air pollution: approach to counseling patients using the Air Quality Health Index.Can Fam Physician. 2011; 57:881–887, e280–e287MedlineGoogle Scholar
48.Chen R, Wang X, Meng X, Hua J, Zhou Z, Chen B, Kan H. Communicating air pollution-related health risks to the public: an application of the Air Quality Health Index in Shanghai, China.Environ Int. 2013; 51:168–173. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2012.11.008CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
49.Perlmutt L, Stieb D, Cromar K. Accuracy of quantification of risk using a single-pollutant Air Quality Index.J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol. 2017; 27:24–32. doi: 10.1038/jes.2015.43CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
50.To T, Feldman L, Simatovic J, Gershon AS, Dell S, Su J, Foty R, Licskai C. Health risk of air pollution on people living with major chronic diseases: a Canadian population-based study.BMJ Open. 2015; 5:e009075. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-009075CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
51.Yao J, Stieb DM, Taylor E, Henderson SB. Assessment of the Air Quality Health Index (AQHI) and four alternate AQHI-Plus amendments for wildfire seasons in British Columbia.Can J Public Health. 2020; 111:96–106. doi: 10.17269/s41997-019-00237-wCrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
52.Chen L, Villeneuve PJ, Rowe BH, Liu L, Stieb DM. The Air Quality Health Index as a predictor of emergency department visits for ischemic stroke in Edmonton, Canada.J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol. 2014; 24:358–364. doi: 10.1038/jes.2013.82CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
53.Cakmak S, Kauri L, Shutt R, Liu L, Green MS, Mulholland M, Stieb D, Dales R. The association between ambient air quality and cardiac rate and rhythm in ambulatory subjects.Environ Int. 2014; 73:365–371. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2014.08.015CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
54.Stieb DM, Shutt R, Kauri L, Mason S, Chen L, Szyszkowicz M, Dobbin NA, Rigden M, Jovic B, Mulholland M, et al. Cardio-respiratory effects of air pollution in a panel study of outdoor physical activity and health in rural older adults.J Occup Environ Med. 2017; 59:356–364. doi: 10.1097/JOM.0000000000000954CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
55.Wen XJ, Balluz L, Mokdad A. Association between media alerts of air quality index and change of outdoor activity among adult asthma in six states, BRFSS, 2005.J Community Health. 2009; 34:40–46. doi: 10.1007/s10900-008-9126-4CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
56.Chen H, Li Q, Kaufman JS, Wang J, Copes R, Su Y, Benmarhnia T. Effect of air quality alerts on human health: a regression discontinuity analysis in Toronto, Canada.Lancet Planet Health. 2018; 2:e19–e26. doi: 10.1016/S2542-5196(17)30185-7CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
57.D’Antoni D, Auyeung V, Walton H, Fuller GW, Grieve A, Weinman J. The effect of evidence and theory-based health advice accompanying smartphone air quality alerts on adherence to preventative recommendations during poor air quality days: a randomised controlled trial.Environ Int. 2019; 124:216–235. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2019.01.002CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
58.Radisic S, Newbold KB. Factors influencing health care and service providers’ and their respective “at risk” populations’ adoption of the Air Quality Health Index (AQHI): a qualitative study.BMC Health Serv Res. 2016; 16:107. doi: 10.1186/s12913-016-1355-0CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
59.US Environmental Protection Agency. Overview of the clean air act and air pollution. Accessed October 10, 2020. https://www.epa.gov/clean-air-act-overviewGoogle Scholar
60.Hooper LG, Kaufman JD. Ambient air pollution and clinical implications for susceptible populations.Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2018; 15suppl 2S64–S68. doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201707-574MGCrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
61.Pope CA, Muhlestein JB, May HT, Renlund DG, Anderson JL, Horne BD. Ischemic heart disease events triggered by short-term exposure to fine particulate air pollution.Circulation. 2006; 114:2443–2448. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.636977LinkGoogle Scholar
62.Villeneuve PJ, Johnson JY, Pasichnyk D, Lowes J, Kirkland S, Rowe BH. Short-term effects of ambient air pollution on stroke: who is most vulnerable?.Sci Total Environ. 2012; 430:193–201. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2012.05.002CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
63.Al-Kindi SG, Sarode A, Zullo M, Brook J, Burnett R, Oliveira GH, Huang W, Brook R, Rajagopalan S. Ambient air pollution and mortality after cardiac transplantation.J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019; 74:3026–3035. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2019.09.066CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
64.Miller KA, Siscovick DS, Sheppard L, Shepherd K, Sullivan JH, Anderson GL, Kaufman JD. Long-term exposure to air pollution and incidence of cardiovascular events in women.N Engl J Med. 2007; 356:447–458. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa054409CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
65.Newby DE, Mannucci PM, Tell GS, Baccarelli AA, Brook RD, Donaldson K, Forastiere F, Franchini M, Franco OH, Graham I, et al; ESC Working Group on Thrombosis, European Association for Cardiovascular Prevention and Rehabilitation; ESC Heart Failure Association. Expert position paper on air pollution and cardiovascular disease.Eur Heart J. 2015; 36:83–93b. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehu458CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
66.Thurston GD, Kipen H, Annesi-Maesano I, Balmes J, Brook RD, Cromar K, De Matteis S, Forastiere F, Forsberg B, Frampton MW, et al. A joint ERS/ATS policy statement: what constitutes an adverse health effect of air pollution? An analytical framework.Eur Respir J. 2017; 49:1600419. doi: 10.1183/13993003.00419-2016CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
67.McDonald F, Horwell CJ, Wecker R, Dominelli L, Loh M, Kamanyire R, Ugarte C. Facemask use for community protection from air pollution disasters: An ethical overview and framework to guide agency decision making.Int J Disaster Risk Reduction. 2020; 43:101376. doi 10.1016/j.ijdrr.2019.101376CrossrefGoogle Scholar
68.US Environmental Protection Agency. Guide to Air Cleaners in the Home. Brochure EPA-402-F-08-004.2018. Accessed October 10, 2020. https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2014-07/documents/aircleaners.pdfGoogle Scholar
69.Siegel JA. Primary and secondary consequences of indoor air cleaners.Indoor Air. 2016; 26:88–96. doi: 10.1111/ina.12194CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
70.Li H, Cai J, Chen R, Zhao Z, Ying Z, Wang L, Chen J, Hao K, Kinney PL, Chen H, et al. Particulate matter exposure and stress hormone levels: a randomized, double-blind, crossover trial of air purification.Circulation. 2017; 136:618–627. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026796LinkGoogle Scholar
71.Chen R, Zhao A, Chen H, Zhao Z, Cai J, Wang C, Yang C, Li H, Xu X, Ha S, et al. Cardiopulmonary benefits of reducing indoor particles of outdoor origin: a randomized, double-blind crossover trial of air purifiers.J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015; 65:2279–2287. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2015.03.553CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
72.Shao D, Du Y, Liu S, Brunekreef B, Meliefste K, Zhao Q, Chen J, Song X, Wang M, Wang J, et al. Cardiorespiratory responses of air filtration: a randomized crossover intervention trial in seniors living in Beijing: Beijing Indoor Air Purifier StudY, BIAPSY.Sci Total Environ. 2017; 603–604:541–549. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.06.095CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
73.Dong W, Liu S, Chu M, Zhao B, Yang D, Chen C, Miller MR, Loh M, Xu J, Chi R, et al. Different cardiorespiratory effects of indoor air pollution intervention with ionization air purifier: findings from a randomized, double-blind crossover study among school children in Beijing.Environ Pollut. 2019; 254pt B113054. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2019.113054CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
74.Maestas MM, Brook RD, Ziemba RA, Li F, Crane RC, Klaver ZM, Bard RL, Spino CA, Adar SD, Morishita M. Reduction of personal PM2.5 exposure via indoor air filtration systems in Detroit: an intervention study.J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol. 2019; 29:484–490. doi: 10.1038/s41370-018-0085-2CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
75.Spilak MP, Karottki GD, Kolarik B, Frederiksen M, Loft S, Gunnarsen L., Gunnarsen L. Evaluation of building characteristics in 27 dwellings in Denmark and the effect of using particle filtration units on PM2.5 concentrations.Build Environ. 2014; 73:55–63CrossrefGoogle Scholar
76.Weichenthal S, Mallach G, Kulka R, Black A, Wheeler A, You H, St-Jean M, Kwiatkowski R, Sharp D. A randomized double-blind crossover study of indoor air filtration and acute changes in cardiorespiratory health in a First Nations community.Indoor Air. 2013; 23:175–184. doi: 10.1111/ina.12019CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
77.Wheeler AJ, Gibson MD, MacNeill M, Ward TJ, Wallace LA, Kuchta J, Seaboyer M, Dabek-Zlotorzynska E, Guernsey JR, Stieb DM. Impacts of air cleaners on indoor air quality in residences impacted by wood smoke.Environ Sci Technol. 2014; 48:12157–12163. doi: 10.1021/es503144hCrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
78.Morishita M, Adar SD, D’Souza J, Ziemba RA, Bard RL, Spino C, Brook RD. Effect of portable air filtration systems on personal exposure to fine particulate matter and blood pressure among residents in a low-income senior facility: a randomized clinical trial.JAMA Intern Med. 2018; 178:1350–1357. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.3308CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
79.Brugge D, Simon MC, Hudda N, Zellmer M, Corlin L, Cleland S, Lu EY, Rivera S, Byrne M, Chung M, et al. Lessons from in-home air filtration intervention trials to reduce urban ultrafine particle number concentrations.Build Environ. 2017; 126:266–275. doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2017.10.007CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
80.Fisk WJ. Health benefits of particle filtration.Indoor Air. 2013; 23:357–368. doi: 10.1111/ina.12036CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
81.Barn P, Gombojav E, Ochir C, Boldbaatar B, Beejin B, Naidan G, Galsuren J, Legtseg B, Byambaa T, Hutcheon JA, et al. The effect of portable HEPA filter air cleaner use during pregnancy on fetal growth: the UGAAR randomized controlled trial.Environ Int. 2018; 121pt 1981–989. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2018.08.036CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
82.Barn PK, Elliott CT, Allen RW, Kosatsky T, Rideout K, Henderson SB. Portable air cleaners should be at the forefront of the public health response to landscape fire smoke.Environ Health. 2016; 15:116. doi: 10.1186/s12940-016-0198-9CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
83.Karottki DG, Spilak M, Frederiksen M, Gunnarsen L, Brauner EV, Kolarik B, Andersen ZJ, Sigsgaard T, Barregard L, Strandberg B, et al. An indoor air filtration study in homes of elderly: cardiovascular and respiratory effects of exposure to particulate matter.Environ Health. 2013; 12:116. doi: 10.1186/1476-069X-12-116CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
84.Padró-Martínez LT, Owusu E, Reisner E, Zamore W, Simon MC, Mwamburi M, Brown CA, Chung M, Brugge D, Durant JL. A randomized cross-over air filtration intervention trial for reducing cardiovascular health risks in residents of public housing near a highway.Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2015; 12:7814–7838. doi: 10.3390/ijerph120707814CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
85.Chuang HC, Ho KF, Lin LY, Chang TY, Hong GB, Ma CM, Liu IJ, Chuang KJ. Long-term indoor air conditioner filtration and cardiovascular health: A randomized crossover intervention study.Environ Int. 2017; 106:91–96. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2017.06.008CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
86.Bräuner EV, Forchhammer L, Møller P, Barregard L, Gunnarsen L, Afshari A, Wåhlin P, Glasius M, Dragsted LO, Basu S, et al. Indoor particles affect vascular function in the aged: an air filtration-based intervention study.Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008; 177:419–425. doi: 10.1164/rccm.200704-632OCCrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
87.Allen RW, Carlsten C, Karlen B, Leckie S, van Eeden S, Vedal S, Wong I, Brauer M. An air filter intervention study of endothelial function among healthy adults in a woodsmoke-impacted community.Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011; 183:1222–1230. doi: 10.1164/rccm.201010-1572OCCrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
88.Kajbafzadeh M, Brauer M, Karlen B, Carlsten C, van Eeden S, Allen RW. The impacts of traffic-related and woodsmoke particulate matter on measures of cardiovascular health: a HEPA filter intervention study.Occup Environ Med. 2015; 72:394–400. doi: 10.1136/oemed-2014-102696CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
89.Cui X, Li F, Xiang J, Fang L, Chung MK, Day DB, Mo J, Weschler CJ, Gong J, He L, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of overnight indoor air filtration in healthy non-smoking adults: a double-blind randomized crossover study.Environ Int. 2018; 114:27–36. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2018.02.010CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
90.Alavy M, Siegel JA. In-situ effectiveness of residential HVAC filters.Indoor Air. 2020; 30:156–166. doi: 10.1111/ina.12617CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
91.Fazli T, Zeng Y, Stephens B. Fine and ultrafine particle removal efficiency of new residential HVAC filters.Indoor Air. 2019; 29:656–669. doi: 10.1111/ina.12566MedlineGoogle Scholar
92.Fisk WJ, Chan WR. Health benefits and costs of filtration interventions that reduce indoor exposure to PM2.5 during wildfires.Indoor Air. 2017; 27:191–204. doi: 10.1111/ina.12285CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
93.Langrish JP, Li X, Wang S, Lee MM, Barnes GD, Miller MR, Cassee FR, Boon NA, Donaldson K, Li J, Li L, Mills NL, Newby DE, Jiang L. Reducing personal exposure to particulate air pollution improves cardiovascular health in patients with coronary heart disease.Environ Health Perspect. 2012; 120:367–372. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1103898CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
94.Laumbach RJ, Kipen HM, Ko S, Kelly-McNeil K, Cepeda C, Pettit A, Ohman-Strickland P, Zhang L, Zhang J, Gong J, et al. A controlled trial of acute effects of human exposure to traffic particles on pulmonary oxidative stress and heart rate variability.Part Fibre Toxicol. 2014; 11:45. doi: 10.1186/s12989-014-0045-5CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
95.Yang X, Jia X, Dong W, Wu S, Miller MR, Hu D, Li H, Pan L, Deng F, Guo X. Cardiovascular benefits of reducing personal exposure to traffic-related noise and particulate air pollution: a randomized crossover study in the Beijing subway system [published online June 13 2018].Indoor Air. doi: 10.1111/ina.12485Google Scholar
96.Shi J, Lin Z, Chen R, Wang C, Yang C, Cai J, Lin J, Xu X, Ross JA, Zhao Z, Kan H. Cardiovascular benefits of wearing particulate-filtering respirators: a randomized crossover trial.Environ Health Perspect. 2017; 125:175–180. doi: 10.1289/EHP73CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
97.Guan T, Hu S, Han Y, Wang R, Zhu Q, Hu Y, Fan H, Zhu T. The effects of facemasks on airway inflammation and endothelial dysfunction in healthy young adults: a double-blind, randomized, controlled crossover study.Part Fibre Toxicol. 2018; 15:30. doi: 10.1186/s12989-018-0266-0CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
98.Langrish JP, Mills NL, Chan JK, Leseman DL, Aitken RJ, Fokkens PH, Cassee FR, Li J, Donaldson K, Newby DE, et al. Beneficial cardiovascular effect of reducing exposure to particulate air pollution with a simple facemask.Part Fibre Toxicol. 2009; 6:8. doi: 10.1186/1743-8977-6-8CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
99.Morishita M, Wang L, Speth K, Zhou N, Bard RL, Li F, Brook JR, Rajagopalan S, Brook RD. Acute blood pressure and cardiovascular effects of near-roadway exposures with and without N95 respirators.Am J Hypertens. 2019; 32:1054–1065. doi: 10.1093/ajh/hpz113CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
100.Han B, Zhang N, Zhao R, Zhang L, Xu J, Yang W, Bai Z, Vedal S. A randomized, double-blind, crossover intervention study of traffic-related air pollution and airway inflammation in healthy adults.Environ Epidemiol. 2019; 3:e066. doi: 10.1097/EE9.0000000000000066CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
101.Shakya KM, Noyes A, Kallin R, Peltier RE. Evaluating the efficacy of cloth facemasks in reducing particulate matter exposure.J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol. 2017; 27:352–357. doi: 10.1038/jes.2016.42CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
102.Patel D, Shibata T, Wilson J, Maidin A. Challenges in evaluating PM concentration levels, commuting exposure, and mask efficacy in reducing PM exposure in growing, urban communities in a developing country.Sci Total Environ. 2016; 543pt A416–424. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.10.163CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
103.Yu N, Shu S, Lin Y, She J, Ip HSS, Qiu X, Zhu Y. High efficiency cabin air filter in vehicles reduces drivers’ roadway particulate matter exposures and associated lipid peroxidation.PLoS One. 2017; 12:e0188498. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0188498CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
104.Lee ES, Zhu Y. Application of a high-efficiency cabin air filter for simultaneous mitigation of ultrafine particle and carbon dioxide exposures inside passenger vehicles.Environ Sci Technol. 2014; 48:2328–2335. doi: 10.1021/es404952qMedlineGoogle Scholar
105.Hudda N, Kostenidou E, Sioutas C, Delfino RJ, Fruin SA. Vehicle and driving characteristics that influence in-cabin particle number concentrations.Environ Sci Technol. 2011; 45:8691–8697. doi: 10.1021/es202025mCrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
106.Chuang HC, Lin LY, Hsu YW, Ma CM, Chuang KJ. In-car particles and cardiovascular health: an air conditioning-based intervention study.Sci Total Environ. 2013; 452–453:309–313. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.02.097CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
107.Wildfire Smoke: A Guide for Public Health Officials.California Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment (OEHHA); 2008. Accessed January 10, 2020 http://oehha.ca.gov/air/risk_assess/wildfirev8.pdfGoogle Scholar
108.Protect your lungs from wildfire smoke.Environmental Health Investigations Branch. California Department of Public Health. Accessed January 10, 2020. https://www.placer.ca.gov/DocumentCenter/View/1467/Information-on-Face-Masks-FiltersGoogle Scholar
109.California Air Resources Board. .California certified air cleaning devices.Accessed January 10, 2020 https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/our-work/programs/air-cleaners-ozone-products/california-certified-air-cleaning-devicesGoogle Scholar
110.Zhang K, Batterman S. Air pollution and health risks due to vehicle traffic.Sci Total Environ. 2013; 450–451:307–316. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.01.074CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
111.Bartow RA, McMurray DN. Erythrocyte receptor (CD2)-bearing T lymphocytes are affected by diet in experimental pulmonary tuberculosis.Infect Immun. 1990; 58:1843–1847. doi: 10.1128/IAI.58.6.1843-1847.1990CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
112.Wilker EH, Mostofsky E, Lue SH, Gold D, Schwartz J, Wellenius GA, Mittleman MA. Residential proximity to high-traffic roadways and poststroke mortality.J Stroke.Cerebrovasc Dis. 2013; 22:e366–e372. doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2013.03.034CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
113.Van Hee VC, Adar SD, Szpiro AA, Barr RG, Bluemke DA, Diez Roux AV, Gill EA, Sheppard L, Kaufman JD. Exposure to traffic and left ventricular mass and function: the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis.Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009; 179:827–834. doi: 10.1164/rccm.200808-1344OCCrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
114.Weaver AM, Wellenius GA, Wu WC, Hickson DA, Kamalesh M, Wang Y. Residential distance to major roadways and cardiac structure in African Americans: cross-sectional results from the Jackson Heart Study.Environ Health. 2017; 16:21. doi: 10.1186/s12940-017-0226-4CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
115.Dorans KS, Wilker EH, Li W, Rice MB, Ljungman PL, Schwartz J, Coull BA, Kloog I, Koutrakis P, D’Agostino RB, et al. Residential proximity to major roads, exposure to fine particulate matter and aortic calcium: the Framingham Heart Study, a cohort study.BMJ Open. 2017; 7:e013455. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-013455CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
116.Zhu Y, Hinds WC, Kim S, Sioutas C. Concentration and size distribution of ultrafine particles near a major highway.J Air Waste Manag Assoc. 2002; 52:1032–1042. doi: 10.1080/10473289.2002.10470842CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
117.Lin LY, Chuang HC, Liu IJ, Chen HW, Chuang KJ. Reducing indoor air pollution by air conditioning is associated with improvements in cardiovascular health among the general population.Sci Total Environ. 2013; 463– 464:176–181. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.05.093CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
118.Tainio M, de Nazelle AJ, Götschi T, Kahlmeier S, Rojas-Rueda D, Nieuwenhuijsen MJ, de Sá TH, Kelly P, Woodcock J. Can air pollution negate the health benefits of cycling and walking?.Prev Med. 2016; 87:233–236. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2016.02.002CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
119.Pasqua LA, Damasceno MV, Cruz R, Matsuda M, Garcia Martins M, Lima-Silva AE, Marquezini M, Saldiva PHN, Bertuzzi R. Exercising in air pollution: the cleanest versus dirtiest cities challenge.Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2018; 15:1502. doi: 10.3390/ijerph15071502Google Scholar
120.de Nazelle A, Nieuwenhuijsen MJ, Antó JM, Brauer M, Briggs D, Braun-Fahrlander C, Cavill N, Cooper AR, Desqueyroux H, et al. Improving health through policies that promote active travel: a review of evidence to support integrated health impact assessment.Environ Int. 2011; 37:766–777. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2011.02.003CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
121.Johan de Hartog J, Boogaard H, Nijland H, Hoek G. Do the health benefits of cycling outweigh the risks?.Environ Health Perspect. 2010; 118:1109–1116CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
122.Johansson C, Lövenheim B, Schantz P, Wahlgren L, Almström P, Markstedt A, Strömgren M, Forsberg B, Sommar JN. Impacts on air pollution and health by changing commuting from car to bicycle.Sci Total Environ. 2017; 584– 585:55–63. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.01.145CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
123.Rojas-Rueda D, de Nazelle A, Teixidó O, Nieuwenhuijsen MJ. Health impact assessment of increasing public transport and cycling use in Barcelona: a morbidity and burden of disease approach.Prev Med. 2013; 57:573–579. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2013.07.021CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
124.Woodcock J, Tainio M, Cheshire J, O’Brien O, Goodman A. Health effects of the London bicycle sharing system: health impact modelling study.BMJ. 2014; 348:g425. doi: 10.1136/bmj.g425CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
125.Sinharay R, Gong J, Barratt B, Ohman-Strickland P, Ernst S, Kelly FJ, Zhang JJ, Collins P, Cullinan P, Chung KF. Respiratory and cardiovascular responses to walking down a traffic-polluted road compared with walking in a traffic-free area in participants aged 60 years and older with chronic lung or heart disease and age-matched healthy controls: a randomised, crossover study.Lancet. 2018; 391:339–349. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32643-0CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
126.Kubesch NJ, Therming Jorgensen J, Hoffmann B, Loft S, Nieuwenhuijsen MJ, Raaschou-Nielsen O, Pedersen M, Hertel O, Overvad K, Tjonneland A, et al. Effects of leisure-time and transport-related physical activities on the risk of incident and recurrent myocardial infarction and interaction with traffic-related air pollution: a cohort study.J Am Heart Assoc. 2018; 7:e009554. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.118.009554LinkGoogle Scholar
127.Sun S, Cao W, Qiu H, Ran J, Lin H, Shen C, Siu-Yin Lee R, Tian L. Benefits of physical activity not affected by air pollution: a prospective cohort study.Int J Epidemiol. 2020; 49:142–152. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyz184CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
128.Tong H. Dietary and pharmacological intervention to mitigate the cardiopulmonary effects of air pollution toxicity.Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016; 1860:2891–2898. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2016.05.014CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
129.Canova C, Dunster C, Kelly FJ, Minelli C, Shah PL, Caneja C, Tumilty MK, Burney P. PM10-induced hospital admissions for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the modifying effect of individual characteristics.Epidemiology. 2012; 23:607–615. doi: 10.1097/EDE.0b013e3182572563CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
130.Romieu I, Meneses F, Ramirez M, Ruiz S, Perez Padilla R, Sienra JJ, Gerber M, Grievink L, Dekker R, Walda I, et al. Antioxidant supplementation and respiratory functions among workers exposed to high levels of ozone.Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1998; 158:226–232. doi: 10.1164/ajrccm.158.1.9712053CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
131.Mohsenin V. Effect of vitamin C on NO2-induced airway hyperresponsiveness in normal subjects. A randomized double-blind experiment.Am Rev Respir Dis. 1987; 136:1408–1411. doi: 10.1164/ajrccm/136.6.1408CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
132.Possamai FP, Júnior SÁ, Parisotto EB, Moratelli AM, Inácio DB, Garlet TR, Dal-Pizzol F, Filho DW. Antioxidant intervention compensates oxidative stress in blood of subjects exposed to emissions from a coal electric-power plant in South Brazil.Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2010; 30:175–180. doi: 10.1016/j.etap.2010.05.006CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
133.Brook RD, Urch B, Dvonch JT, Bard RL, Speck M, Keeler G, Morishita M, Marsik FJ, Kamal AS, Kaciroti N, et al. Insights into the mechanisms and mediators of the effects of air pollution exposure on blood pressure and vascular function in healthy humans.Hypertension. 2009; 54:659–667. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.130237LinkGoogle Scholar
134.Sack CS, Jansen KL, Cosselman KE, Trenga CA, Stapleton PL, Allen J, Peretz A, Olives C, Kaufman JD. Pretreatment with antioxidants augments the acute arterial vasoconstriction caused by diesel exhaust inhalation.Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2016; 193:1000–1007. doi: 10.1164/rccm.201506-1247OCCrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
135.Lin Z, Chen R, Jiang Y, Xia Y, Niu Y, Wang C, Liu C, Chen C, Ge Y, Wang W, et al. Cardiovascular benefits of fish-oil supplementation against fine particulate air pollution in China.J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019; 73:2076–2085. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.12.093CrossrefMedlineGoogle Scholar
136.Lim CC, Hayes RB, Ahn J, Shao Y, Silverman DT, Jones RR, Thurston GD. Mediterranean diet and the association between air pollution and cardiovascular disease mortality risk.Circulation. 2019; 139:1766–1775. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.035742LinkGoogle Scholar
137.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Outdoor Air. Health Impacts of Fine Particles in Air. 2020. Accessed January 10, 2020. https://ephtracking.cdc.gov/showAirHIA.actionGoogle Scholar
138.Bhatnagar A. Environmental determinants of cardiovascular disease.Circ Res. 2017; 121:162–180. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.117.306458LinkGoogle Scholar
