Protecting maternal, newborn
and child health from the
impacts of climate change
A call for action
Cover photo
©UNICEF/Asad Zaidi
Bakhtawar, a mother of four children, sits next to flood water, after fleeing their flood-hit home. She and her family
have taken refuge on the roadside in Jacobabad district, Sindh Province, Pakistan.
1
>> Climate change is one of the gravest threats facing humanity.
Pregnant women*
, newborns and children face distinct risks
from climate change-related health impacts, due to a host of
physiological, clinical, social and behavioural factors.
>> Climate change is a growing threat to maternal, newborn and
child health that can no longer be ignored. With progress
stalling on many fronts, immediate action is needed to meet
the Sustainable Development Goals, with a focus on women,
newborns and children.
>> Hard-won advances of the past decades for maternal, newborn
and child survival and well-being must be protected to ensure
the right to health for all.
*The term “women” is used to refer to all those who identify as women regardless of sex assigned at birth but
recognizes that there are other gender-diverse individuals who do not identify as women but who have reproductive capacity. The intention is not to exclude their experiences but reflects the current lack of data identifying, and/
or reflecting the specific experiences of, gender-diverse individuals.
©WHO/Billy Miaron
Women from a temporary camp in Modeka, Kenya, fetch drinking water from a makeshift trough. Most people in
the camp have been hit hard by the ongoing drought in the region.
INDIRECT
Known effects and impacts of
climate change on health
DIRECT
Adapted from Etzel RA, Weimann E, Homer C et al. The impacts of climate change across the life course. (unpublished)
Temperature
extremes
Ambient air pollution
Rising sea levels
and salination
Threats to livelihoods and
human rights
Displacement and
migration
Floods and drought
Windstorms and
wild fires
Infectious and vectorborne diseases
Weakened health systems
and infrastructure
Impacts on food and
water systems
Exacerbation of social
determinants and
inequalities
2
3
© WHO/NOOR/Sebastian Liste
A wildfire burned at least 400 hectares on the border between Spain and Portugal in 2022. Climate change makes
it more likely for droughts and wildfires to happen.
While there is a need to understand the potential risks of climate change better,
available evidence suggests links between climate change and adverse health effects.
Climate change is altering the epidemiology, geography of health conditions, such
as respiratory conditions. With rising temperatures, the geography and intensity
of vector-borne disease are shifting and increasing. Both too little water (due to
drought) and too much water (due to flooding) impact agriculture, food security,
housing and infrastructure, as well as safe access to clean water, sanitation and
hygiene, and access to health services and information. At its extreme, climate
change can manifest as humanitarian crises, contributing to mass migration,
accelerating population displacement.
What we know now serves as a justifiable basis for urgent action by stakeholders
to invest and develop climate action plans for all individuals that focus on
improving maternal, newborn and child health (MNCH) – now and in the long-term. 
4
 Climate risks
to maternal, newborn
and child health
Extreme heat, are
associated with
incr eased risks
of developing
complications
that lead
to adverse
maternal,
perinatal
and neonatal
outcomes.
Maternal and perinatal
Climate hazards, including extreme heat, are associated with increased risks of
developing complications that lead to adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes.
These may include multiple causes of maternal and neonatal morbidity and
mortality such as gestational diabetes, hypertensive disorders of pregnancy,
preterm birth, low birth weight and stillbirth.
In addition to the health risks related to poor nutrition, water, hygiene and
sanitation, the effects of exposure to climate hazards and their aftermath during
and after pregnancy can affect mental health and contribute to intergenerational
trauma. They may increase stress, anxiety and depression – known risk factors
for adverse perinatal outcomes.
5
Women and girls carry a disproportionate burden of the impacts of climate change, since it
contributes to the complex interplay of gender and social norms and roles within homes and
communities. As women often engage in agriculture and other outdoor or household work
such as collecting water and cooking outdoors, they are at greater risk of additional exposure
to temperature extremes and vector-spread infectious diseases; this includes pregnant and
postpartum women. Emergencies caused by climate change, as well as financial and economic
stress, also put women and children at increased risk of violence.
Newborns and infants
Newborn babies undergo rapid development. Their immature temperature regulation systems and
their dependency on others for cooling, shading and feeding explain their increased vulnerability to
climate change.
Climate change-related exposures during infancy such as exposures to extreme heat and air
pollution are associated with increased mortality and morbidity from stunting, respiratory diseases
and adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes. As prenatal and early-life exposures influence
developmental trajectories, the effects of climate change are not limited to immediate
adverse and negative health effects and have the potential to reverberate across a
lifetime, predisposing infants to later disease in adulthood.
©World Meteorological Organization
A young person braves the drought in Shyamnagar Union, Bangladesh, trekking to a reservoir to collect water. Despite the
passage of many years since Cyclone Aila, the community continues to endure the struggle for access to clean drinking water. 
6
Extreme weather
events can
also negatively
impact parents
and caregivers’
mental health
due to trauma,
financial strain
and loss of
housing...
Children
Extreme weather events, such as floods and severe tropical storms, can
increase rates of depression and post-traumatic stress disorder in children,
with potentially long-lasting mental health impacts into adulthood. Extreme
weather events can also negatively impact parents and caregivers’ mental
health due to trauma, financial strain and loss of housing and other
resources, for example. Post-disaster distress in parents, in turn, can impact
on family functioning and increase the risk of poor parenting. Changes in
temperature, as well as precipitation and humidity, have a direct effect on
children’s health. For example, high temperatures can increase pathogens in
water and food, putting children at an elevated risk for diarrhoeal disease.
High temperatures are also associated with food insecurity and other factors,
increasing the risk of childhood undernutrition, especially in children under
two years of age.
Extreme temperatures, both hot and cold, and poor quality air, negatively affect
respiratory health in children. Such exposures impair lung function, increase
the risk of asthma and lead to more frequent respiratory infections. Combined
with food insecurity, children are at greater risk of malnutrition as well as
increased mortality.
Health systems that support maternal,
newborn and child health
Extreme weather events due to climate change impact communities and the
functioning of health systems through loss of physical infrastructure and
threats to human resources. Families and communities can face barriers in
accessing any health services and become compromised in their ability to
withstand the consequences of extreme heat, drought, landslides or flooding.
Health workers in affected communities may face undue challenges in
providing care while managing personal safety. Disruptions in basic health
services in rural and urban settings jeopardize access and quality of MNCH
care, including sexual and reproductive health services.
7
The impact of climate change on MNCH demands
action. In addition to a wide range of immediate health
risks, climate change threatens to lead to many longterm consequences that affect the health and well-being
of women, newborns and children throughout their lives.
A call for action
NOW!
©World Meteorological Organization
A woman carries a child through floods in Indonesia caused by the Sunter River overflowing.
8
The health of pregnant women, mothers, newborns and children reflects
the stability and robustness of a community’s resilience to potential health
disruptions. The evidence linking global warming with adverse outcomes is
mounting and is cause for alarm. While climate change will affect all populations,
it is critical to remember that women, newborns and children are impacted
disproportionately. The 2015 Paris Agreement called “for Parties taking action to
address climate change to respect and promote the right to health.” Yet actions
have thus far been insufficient. Few Nationally Determined Contributions even
mention maternal and child health – a glaring omission and emblematic of the
status of women, newborns and children in the climate change discourse.
©UNICEF/Ocon/AFP-Services
A family protects themselves under the house of their neighbours after theirs was destroyed by the strong winds
brought by Hurricane Iota in Nicaragua.
9
The World Health Organization, the United Nations Children’s
Fund, and the United Nations Population Fund together call on
Member States, partners, collaborators and stakeholders to
protect the health of women, newborns and children from the
impacts of climate change.
Without delay, the following urgent actions must be taken to achieve a healthy,
sustainable and equitable future for all.
>> Address the needs of women, newborns and children in
the global climate response.
Existing global commitments, frameworks and policies for climate adaptation
inadequately address or neglect the risks of climate change on MNCH. Climate
response polices should prioritize women, newborns and children. These policies
need to recognize and address climate risks to health, including policies to
reduce carbon emissions and protect health. The needs of women, newborns and
children should be integrated into climate mitigation, adaptation and disaster risk
reduction strategies, to address their unique needs, including access to essential
sexual, reproductive, maternal, newborn and child health services.
>> Frame climate change as a health and human rights issue
with a human capital approach.
Inequalities in power structures influence the causes and consequences of
climate change on the health of women, girls and gender-diverse people,
especially those facing multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination.
Considering the impact of intersectional factors such as gender, age,
culture and equity when addressing the impact of climate change supports
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. By amplifying
underrepresented voices and ensuring meaningful participation, genderresponsive and equitable climate action under the Paris Agreement can
be created, leading to creative solutions that are context-appropriate and
aim to ensure high-quality MNCH care that is available, accessible and
acceptable to all in need. This approach must be holistic and built over time,
acknowledging the cumulative effect that access to services offers over a
lifetime. Human rights must be prioritized in climate change preparedness,
adaptation and mitigation planning. Consideration should be given to
existing inequities in access to and quality of MNCH care. The needs of
women, newborns, children and adolescents are essential in decisionmaking, from local to national levels. 
10
>> Institute robust monitoring frameworks.
There is an urgent need to better understand the links between climate-related
exposures and MNCH and well-being. Countries need to strengthen existing
monitoring frameworks and agree on indicators to track health outcomes with
disaggregated, spatially-referenced population data, including the location,
characteristics and mobility of populations in areas exposed to current and
projected climate hazards. This will improve the quality of services provided
and help target resources to populations and areas with the most needs, as
well as allow countries to track progress over time.
©WHO/Yoshi Shimizu
Air pollution captured in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
11
>> Accelerate research and share information on the impact
of climate change and MNCH.
Significant data gaps remain in our understanding of the potential health risks
of climate change, including a lack of studies from low- and middle-income
countries. As the available evidence on the impact of climate risks on MNCH
is synthesized, research on potential strategies and interventions to reduce the
negative health effects from the impacts of climate change during the critical
periods of pregnancy, infancy and childhood is paramount. High-quality data are
necessary to estimate the global burden of climate-related impacts on MNCH
and quantify the strength of these associations. All actors should contribute
to building knowledge on the effect of climate change on health risks for
MNCH. Education on the concepts of climate change should be available for all
individuals, at community level and within health worker training programmes.
Understanding the effects of climate change on health will enhance willingness
to act on climate change and to ensure that high-quality data are available to
strengthen knowledge of its impacts. Research is also needed to identify the
effectiveness of interventions to address these climate-related health outcomes,
as well as to articulate the relationship between climate change, social
determinants of health and their corresponding risks to MNCH. Understanding
the context and conditions needed to implement effective interventions will be
critical to scaling sustainable actions.
>> Strengthen resilient health systems sustainably.
Action is needed to reduce carbon emissions in the health sector to improve
health. The health sector is responsible for up to 4.4% of all greenhouse gas
emissions, although these emissions are not experienced or emitted equally.
Climate-resilient, low-carbon and environmentally sustainable health-care
facilities protect MNCH from water scarcity and food insecurity, as well as unsafe
structural environments. Health facilities guarantee the availability, quality and
accessibility of health services for women and children. These facilities are
vulnerable to climate change and other environmental stresses. It is essential that
climate and health programmes reflect the voices and needs of women, children,
adolescents and youth, communities and health workers, with MNCH services
integrated into ongoing activities to mitigate climate change. A health sector
that is fit for the future is able to increase the capacity for protecting health in an
unstable and changing climate by building climate resilience and contributing to
mitigation through reduced greenhouse gas emissions, becoming low-carbon or
net-zero systems and reducing all other negative impacts on the environment,
without forgetting how to address the health and needs of health workers while
keeping person-centred care at the forefront.
12
>> Promote greater collaboration between sectors to jointly
define long-term, sustainable policies that outline MNCH
targets in climate financing policy.
Climate change and climate hazards have serious economic and fiscal impacts.
Increases in government expenditures due to additional demands resulting from
exposure to climate hazards reduce the availability of funding, which in turn can
impact the availability of resources for MNCH. There is a need to strategically
mobilize funds to enhance and expand the climate resilience of the health
sector with specific allocation to MNCH needs. At the microeconomic level, the
negative consequences include increases in out-of-pocket payments for health
care and reductions in household livelihoods and income, which can affect the
affordability of MNCH services and reduce access to health care. Investments
in primary health care within universal health coverage are needed to ensure
that MNCH services are available and affordable to all who need them.
Multilateral climate funds and climate-related assistance can jointly promote
MNCH goals, with a particular focus on distributional effects for the populations
most affected by climate events. Similarly, financing mechanisms for MNCH
can incorporate or improve service provision across multiple sectors, including
financing global health-responsive climate action. Commitment is needed to
ensure that adaptation programmes allocate resources to the health sector,
including ensuring an equal split in adaptation and mitigation financing.
©UNICEF/Haro
A pregnant mother near flooded areas in Moosa Jessear village, Sindh Province, Pakistan. Noor’s first baby
passed away due to complications during her first pregnancy; her second child died at only three days old when
floods hit Pakistan in August 2022.
13
Every action will count.
Pledge your commitment to protect MNCH
needs from the impact of climate change,
now, for the future.
>> Prioritize an “all of society”, multisectoral approach to
take sustained and impactful action on MNCH in the
climate change response.
Communities, social sectors, private sector actors and governments need
to come together around shared goals and responsibilities to institute the
necessary enabling environments to protect MNCH from the direct and
indirect impacts of climate change. A coordinated response to the climate
change and health crisis requires integrated, multisectoral programming.
This approach will be key to providing comprehensive solutions that promote
resilience and sustainable growth, particularly in heavily affected areas. It
is crucial to promote collective action outside the health sector, such as
the energy, agriculture, housing, education and private sectors. Economic
stability is mandatory for addressing and mitigating the effects of climate
change on populations at risk. Private sector actors have a responsibility to
contribute to maintaining this stability, sustainably, as it is key to managing
business risks and ensuring long-term returns on investment. The private
sector will be a critical partner in delivering effective solutions that reduce
the risk of adverse MNCH outcomes.
Show your support for climate action
14
Bibliography
Bekkar B, Pacheco S, Basu R et al. Association of air pollution and heat exposure with preterm birth,
low birth weight, and stillbirth in the US: a systematic review. JAMA Network Open. 2020;3(6):e208243
doi: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.8243.
Beltran AJ, Wu J, Laurent O. Associations of meteorology with adverse pregnancy outcomes: A
systematic review of preeclampsia, preterm birth and birth weight. Int J Environ Res Public Health.
2014;11(1):91-172 doi: 10.3390/ijerph110100091.
Casey G, Shayegh S, Moreno-Cruz J et al. The impact of climate change on fertility. Environ Res Lett.
2019;14:054007. doi: 10.1088/1748-9326/ab0843.
Chersich M, Pham MD, Areal A et al. Associations between high temperatures in pregnancy and
risk of preterm birth, low birth weight, and stillbirths. A systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ.
2020;371:m3811 doi: 10.1136/bmj.m3811.
Chersich MF, Scorgie F, Filippi V et al. Climate Change and Heat-Health Study Group. Increasing
global temperatures threaten gains in maternal and newborn health in Africa: A review of impacts
and an adaptation framework. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2023;160(2):421-429. doi: 10.1002/ijgo.14381.
Conway F, Portela A, Filippi V et al. Climate change impacts on maternal and newborn health: an
overview of systematic reviews. (unpublished).
Costello A, Abbas M, Allen A et al. Managing the health effects of climate change: Lancet and
University College London Institute for Global Health Commission. Lancet. 2009;373(9676):1693–
1733. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60935-1.
Etzel RA, Weimann E, Homer C et al. The impacts of climate change across the life course.
(unpublished).
Evans J, Bansal A, Schoenaker DAJM et al. Birth outcomes, health, and health care needs of
childbearing women following wildfire disasters: an integrative, state-of-the-science review.
Environ Health Perspect 2022;130(8):86001. doi: 10.1289/EHP10544.
Giudice LC, Llamas-Clark EF, DeNicola N et al. the FIGO Committee on Climate Change and Toxic
Environmental Exposures. Climate change, women’s health, and the role of obstetricians and
gynecologists in leadership. Int J Gynecol Obstet. 2021;155:345-356 doi.org/10.1002/ijgo.13958.
Kuehn L, McCormick S. Heat exposure and maternal health in the face of climate change. Int J
Environ Res Public Health 2017;14(8):853 doi: 10.3390/ijerph14080853.
Nagata JM, Epstein A, Ganson KT et al. Drought and child vaccination coverage in 22 countries in
sub-Saharan Africa: A retrospective analysis of national survey data from 2011 to 2019. PLoS Med.
2021;18(9):e1003678. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1003678.
Nakstad B, Filippi V, Lusambili A et al. How climate change may threaten progress in neonatal
health in the African region. Neonatology 2022;119(5):644-651 doi: 10.1159/000525573.
Paris Agreement to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Dec. 12, 2015,
T.I.A.S. No. 16-1104.
Perera FP. Multiple threats to child health from fossil fuel combustion: impacts of air pollution and
climate change. Environ Health Perspect 2017;125:141-8 doi: 10.1289/EHP299.
Perera F, Nadeau K. Climate change, fossil-fuel pollution, and children’s health. N Engl J Med 2022;
386(24): 2303-2313 doi: 10.1056/NEJMra2117706.
15
Poursafa P, Keikha M, Kelishadi R. Systematic review on adverse birth outcomes of climate change.
J Res Med Sci. 2015;20(4):397-402 PMCID: PMC4468458.
Proulx K, Daelmans B, Baltag V et al. Climate change impacts on child and adolescent health and
wellbeing: a narrative review. (unpublished).
Romanello M, Di Napoli C, Drummond P et al. The 2022 report of the Lancet Countdown on health
and climate change: health at the mercy of fossil fuels. Lancet. 2022;400(10363):1619-1654 doi:
10.1016/S0140-6736(22)01540-9.
Rothschild J, Haase E. Women’s mental health and climate change Part II: Socioeconomic
stresses of climate change and eco-anxiety for women and their children. Int J Gynaecol Obstet.
2023;160(2):414-420 doi: 10.1002/ijgo.14514.
Saghafi N, Pourali L, Ghavami Ghanbarabadi V et al. Serum heat shock protein 70 in preeclampsia
and normal pregnancy: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Reprod Biomed. 2018;16(1):1-
8 PMCID: PMC5899764.
Segal TR, Giudice LC. Systematic review of climate change effects on reproductive health. Fertil
Steril 2022;118(2):215-224 doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2022.06.005.
Smith CJ. Pediatric thermoregulation: considerations in the face of global climate change.
Nutrients 2019;11:2010 doi: 10.3390/nu11092010.
United Nations Population Fund and Queen Mary University of London. Taking stock: sexual and
reproductive and health and rights in climate commitments – a global review. 2023, New York:
United Nations Population Fund. https://www.unfpa.org/publications/taking-stock-sexual-andreproductive-and-health-and-rights-climate-commitments-global.
UNICEF. Climate mobility and children. https://www.unicef.org/globalinsight/climate-mobilityand-children, accessed 16 February 2023.
52nd session of the Commission on the Status of Women “Gender perspectives on climate
change,” Issues paper for interactive expert panel on Emerging issues, trends and new approaches
to issues affecting the situation of women or equality between women and men. 2008, http://www.
un.org/womenwatch/daw/csw/csw52/issuespapers/Gender%20and%20climate%20change%20
paper%20final.pdf.
World Health Organization. Mainstreaming gender in health adaptation to climate change
programmes. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012 (https://www.who.int/publications/m/
item/mainstreaming-gender-in-health-adaptation-to-climate-change-programmes).
World Health Organization. Gender, climate change, and health. Geneva: World Health Organization;
2014 (https://iris.who.int/handle/10665/144781).
World Health Organization. Operational framework for building climate resilient health systems.
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015 (https://iris.who.int/handle/10665/189951).
World Health Organization. WHO guidance for climate resilient and environmentally sustainable health
care facilities. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020 (https://iris.who.int/handle/10665/335909).
World Health Organization. Operational framework for building climate resilient and low carbon
health systems. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2023 (https://iris.who.int/bitstream/hand
le/10665/373837/9789240081888-eng.pdf?sequence=1).
16
Methods
This call for action to protect maternal, newborn and child health from the
impacts of climate change was conceptualized and developed through a
consultative process between WHO, UNICEF and UNFPA. It is based upon the
WHO Operational framework for building climate-resilient and low carbon health
systems and the impact of climate change on maternal, newborn and child
health, as described in the reviews by Conway et al. and Proulx et al.
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements are due to the many experts whose contributions made this
publication possible.
Technical contributions were made by:
WHO: Doris Chou (Department of Sexual and Reproductive Health); Francesca
Conway, Bernadette Daelmans and Anayda Portela (Maternal, Newborn. Child and
Adolescent Health and Ageing); Diarmid Campbell-Lendrum and Elena Villalobos
Prats (Department of Climate Change and Health).
UNFPA: Angela Baschieri, Chiagozie Udeh, Michel Brun and Willibald Zeck.
UNICEF: Gagan Gupta, Tedbabe Hailegebriel, Swathi Manchikanti and
Abheet Solomon.
PMNCH: Etienne Langlois, Giulia Gasparri and Domenico Iaia.
Assistance with technical drafting was undertaken by Blair Wylie: The
Collaborative for Women’s Environmental Health at Columbia, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Columbia University Medical Center, USA.
Designed by: Rizelle Stander Hartmeier
WHO acknowledges the financial support to HRP (the UNDP/UNFPA/UNICEF/
WHO/World Bank Special Programme of Research, Development and Research
Training in Human Reproduction) from the United States Agency for International
Development and to the WHO Department of Maternal, Newborn, Child, and
Adolescent Health and Ageing through funds received from the WHO Department
of Climate Change and Health and from the Government of Spain.
17
Protecting maternal, newborn and child health from the impacts of
climate change: a call for action
ISBN 978-92-4-008535-0 (electronic version)
ISBN 978-92-4-008536-7 (print version)
© World Health Organization 2023. Some rights reserved.
This work is available under the CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO licence.
Contact us:
World Health Organization
20 Avenue Appia
1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland
Department of Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research
Email: srhhrp@who.int
Website: www.who.int/teams/sexual-and-reproductive-health-and-research-(srh)/humanreproduction-programme
Department of Maternal, Newborn, Child, and Adolescent Health and Ageing
Email: mncah@who.int
Website: www.who.int/teams/maternal-newborn-child-adolescent-health-and-ageing