WILDFIRE SMOKE FACTSHEET
Protect yourself from harmful ash when you clean up after a wildfire. Cleanup work can expose you to 
ash and other products of the fire that may irritate your eyes, nose, or skin and cause coughing and other 
health effects. Ash inhaled deeply into lungs may cause asthma attacks and make it difficult to breathe. 
Ash is made up of larger and tiny particles (dust, dirt, and soot). Ash deposited on surfaces both indoors 
and outdoors can be inhaled if it becomes airborne when you clean up. Ash from burned structures is 
generally more hazardous than forest ash. Avoid Ash Exposure
Avoid direct contact with ash. If you get ash 
on your skin, in your eyes, or in your mouth, 
wash it off as soon as you can. 
People with heart or lung disease, including 
asthma, older adults, children, and pregnant 
women should use special caution around 
ash.   
Children and pets: Children should not be 
nearby while you clean up ash. Do not allow 
children to play in ash.  Clean ash off all 
children’s toys before use. Clean ash off pets 
and other animals. Keep pets away from 
contaminated sites.  Recommended Actions
Clothing: Wear gloves, long-sleeved shirts, 
long pants, shoes and socks to avoid skin 
contact. Goggles are also a good idea 
Contact with wet ash can cause chemical 
burns or skin irritation. Change your shoes 
and clothing before you leave the cleanup 
site to avoid tracking ash offsite, into your 
car, or other places. 
Protecting your lungs: Wear a tight-fitting 
respirator that filters ash particles from the 
air you breathe to help protect your lungs. 
Select a respirator that has been tested and 
approved by NIOSH and has the words 
“NIOSH” and either “N95” or “P100” printed 
on it. These have two straps and are 
available online, and at many hardware 
stores and pharmacies. Buy respirators in a 
size that can be tightened over your mouth 
and nose with a snug seal to your face. 
Surgical masks and one-strap dust masks will 
not protect your lungs. They are not 
designed to seal tightly to the face. If you 
have heart or lung disease talk to your 
doctor before using a respirator or working 
around ash.   
Use an N95 respirator and 
avoid skin contact with ash.
Protect Yourself from Ash
5/28/20  This information was developed before the COVID-19 health emergency.  Please supplement this 
information with the latest advice from state, local, Tribal and federal agencies, including the EPA website 
https://www.epa.gov/coronavirus and CDC webpage https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html 
Cleanup: Avoid stirring up or sifting through 
ash as much as you can. Avoid actions that 
kick ash particles up into the air, such as dry 
sweeping. Before sweeping indoor and 
outdoor hard surfaces, mist them with water 
to keep dust down. Follow with wet 
mopping. Use a damp cloth or wet mop on 
lightly dusted areas. When you wet down 
ash, use as little water as you can.  
Vacuum: Use a high-efficiency particulate air 
(HEPA)-type vacuum to clean dusty surfaces. 
Don’t use a typical household vacuum or a 
shop vacuum. They will send the collected 
dust or ash out into the air. Don’t use leaf 
blowers or do anything else that will put ash 
into the air.  
Food and Water: Wash any home-grown 
fruits or vegetables from trees or gardens 
where ash has fallen. Avoid bringing food or 
eating at the affected site, unless you keep 
the food in a sealed container. 
Wash your hands well before eating. Check 
with your drinking water provider to be sure 
your water is safe to drink.  
Disposal: Collected ash may be disposed of 
in the regular trash. Ash should be stored in 
plastic bags or other containers to prevent it 
from being stirred up. If you suspect 
hazardous waste, including asbestos, is 
present, contact your local hazardous waste 
authorities regarding appropriate disposal. 
Avoid washing ash into storm drains. For more information: Get air quality information: Check your local news, theairnow.govwebsite, or your state air quality agency’s website.Learn about home air cleaners: https://www.epa.gov/indoor-air-quality-iaq/guide-air-cleaners-homeFind certified air cleaning devices: http://www.arb.ca.gov/research/indoor/aircleaners/certified.htmLearn how to use an N95 respirator mask:  http://www.bepreparedcalifornia.ca.gov/ResourcesAndLinks/Languages/Documents/English/ENG_ProtectLungsSmoke7208color.pdfLearn more about wildfire smoke: Wildfire Smoke, A Guide for Public Health Officials: https://www3.epa.gov/airnow/wildfire_may2016.pdf
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ·  EPA- 452/F-18-004
