Your pets can be affected by wildfire smoke. If you feel the effects of smoke, they probably do, too! 
Smoke can irritate your pet’s eyes and respiratory tract. Animals with heart or lung disease and older pets are 
especially at risk from smoke and should be closely watched during all periods of poor air quality. 
Know the Signs 
If your animals have any of these signs, call your 
veterinarian:   
•
Coughing or gagging
•
Red or watery eyes, nasal discharge,
inflammation of throat or mouth or
reluctance to eat hard foods
•
Trouble breathing, including open-mouth
breathing, more noise when breathing, or
fast breathing
•
Fatigue or weakness, disorientation, uneven
gait, stumbling
•
Reduced appetite or thirst
Recommended Actions 
Even if the fire danger is not imminent, high levels 
of smoke may force you to stay indoors for a long 
time or even to evacuate. Reduce your pet’s 
exposure to smoke as you would reduce your own. 
Before the fire season: 
•
Whether you have a central air conditioning
system or a room unit, buy high efficiency
filters you can use to capture fine particles
from smoke.
•
Think about creating a clean room in your
house with a portable air cleaner.
When smoke is present: 
•
Keep pets indoors as much as you can, with
doors and windows closed. Bring outdoor
pets into a room with good ventilation, like
a utility room, garage, or bathroom. Move 
potentially dangerous products, such as 
pesticides, out of the reach of pets. 
•
Smoke is especially tough on your pet
birds. Keep them inside when smoke is
present.
•
Keep indoor air clean: do not fry or broil
foods, vacuum, burn candles, use a
fireplace or woodstove, or smoke tobacco
products. These activities add particles to
your home.
•
Spend less time outdoors and limit physical
activities when it is smoky. For example,
when it’s smoky, it’s not a good time for
you and your pet to go for a run. Let dogs
and cats outside only for brief bathroom
breaks if air quality alerts are in effect.
Be ready to evacuate: Include your pets in your 
planning. Have each pet permanently identified, for 
example with a microchip. Know where they will be 
allowed to go if there is an evacuation – not all 
emergency shelters accept pets. Know where your 
pets might hide when stressed, so you won’t have 
to spend time looking for them in an emergency. 
Get pets used to their carriers and have your family 
practice evacuating with your pets. Covering 
carriers with a sheet during transport may calm a 
nervous pet. 
If you must leave your pets behind, never 
tie them up.  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency • EPA-452/F-19-002
For more information: 
•
Get air quality information: Check your local news, the airnow.gov website, or your state air quality agency’s
website.
•
Reduce Your Smoke Exposure fact sheet: https://www.airnow.gov/publications/wildfire-smoke-guide/
reduce-your-smoke-exposure/
•
Learn more about wildfire smoke: Wildfire Smoke Guide for Public Health Officials:  https://airnow.gov/
•
American Veterinary Medical Association. Get more tips and information on caring for pets and livestock
during a wildfire: https://www.avma.org/public/EmergencyCare/Pages/Wildfire-Smoke-and-Animals.aspx
Evacuation Kit 
Prepare a pet Evacuation Kit. Assemble 
the kit well before any emergency and 
store it in an easy-to-carry, waterproof 
container close to an exit.  
•
Food, water, and medicine for 7 to 10
days
•
Sanitation and first aid supplies
•
Important documents, such as:
identification papers including proof of
ownership; vaccination records;
medical records and medication
instructions; emergency contact list,
including veterinarian and pharmacy;
and a photo of your pet (preferably
with you)
•
Travel supplies, such as: crate or pet
carrier labeled with your contact
information; extra collar/harness with
ID tags and leash; flashlight, extra
batteries; and muzzle
•
Comfort items, such as favorite toys
and treats, and an extra blanket or
familiar bedding 
