A S H R A E J O U R N A L 
ashrae.org 
MARCH 2021
38
IEQ APPLICATIONS
Column
©ASHRAE www.ashrae.org. Used with permission from ASHRAE Journal at www.epa.gov. This article may not be copied nor distributed in either paper or digital form 
without ASHRAE’s permission. For more information about ASHRAE, visit www.ashrae.org.
Protecting Building 
Occupants From Smoke 
During Wildfire and 
Prescribed Burn Events
BY TOM JAVINS, P.E. LIFE MEMBER ASHRAE; GAIL ROBARGE; EMILY GIBB SNYDER, PH.D.; GREGORY NILSSON; STEVEN J. EMMERICH, FELLOW ASHRAE
ASHRAE Guideline 44P, Protecting Building Occupants from Smoke During Wildfire and Prescribed 
Burn Events, will provide HVAC and building measures to minimize occupant exposures 
and health impacts from smoke during wildfire and prescribed burn smoke events. This 
column summarizes the planning framework for Guideline 44P, which is being shared 
by the guideline committee to provide immediate information on this pressing issue 
while the committee continues work on the complete guideline. 
The planning framework includes information 
for building managers on developing their Smoke 
Readiness Plan, preparing for smoke events by having 
supplies on hand and testing procedures in advance, 
and knowing when and how to implement measures in 
their plans. The document, “Planning Framework for 
Protecting Commercial Building Occupants from Smoke 
During Wildfire Events,” can be found at https://tinyurl.
com/yxyuqh72.
What is the Concern and Who is at Risk?
In 2020, in the U.S. alone, over 58,000 wildfires 
occurred, burning more than 10 million acres 
(4 million ha).1 Increasing numbers of wildfires and 
large numbers of people living at wildland-urban inter­
faces makes protecting building occupants from smoke 
critically important. Wildfire smoke is composed of fine 
particulate matter (PM2.5, particles less than 2.5 m 
in diameter) and gases. Although wildfire smoke con­
tains multiple contaminants, this document focuses 
on controlling exposure to PM2.5. Breathing high con­
centrations of these pollutants can cause respiratory 
and cardiovascular health effects, especially for those 
*To find out more about local ambient air quality see AirNow.gov and 
state websites.3,4 The U.S. Air Quality Index, shown on AirNow.gov, 
has six categories indicating levels of heath concern as a function of 
PM2.5 concentrations.5
Tom Javins, P.E., is a mechanical engineer at the University of Montana in Missoula, 
Mont. Gail Robarge is a physical scientist and Emily Gibb Snyder, Ph.D., is a chemist 
at the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development in 
Washington, D.C. Gregory Nilsson is a technical officer at National Research Council 
Canada in Ottawa, ON, Canada. Steven J. Emmerich is Indoor Air Quality and Ventilation 
Group Leader at the National Institute of Standards and Technology in Gaithersburg, Md.
FIGURE 1 Process for making a building smoke ready.
with preexisting conditions such as asthma or heart 
disease.2 While most healthy people will recover quickly 
from exposure to smoke during a wildfire episode, some 
susceptible populations are also at greater risk of health 
effects, including pregnant women, infants, children 
and older adults.2
When Do Building Managers Need to Take Action? 
Knowing when to implement building measures is 
critical for building managers. State and local health 
departments may issue air quality notifications when 
actions are needed to protect the public, and these noti­
fications help building managers know when to initi­
ate smoke mitigation efforts, outlined in their “Smoke 
Readiness Plan.” Table 1 provides an easy to use decision 
matrix to help managers know when to implement the 
plan. The planning framework suggests that building 
managers consider implementing the plan when smoky 
conditions are likely to affect vulner­
able populations.*
What is the Scope of the Framework?
This planning framework primar­
ily focuses on reducing exposure to 
particulate matter and applies to most 
commercial buildings (e.g., retail, 
office space), schools, multiunit resi­
dential buildings and similar build­
ings that use air-handling units to 
provide HVAC. These recommendations are not intended 
for single-family homes or individual dwelling tunits. 
Health-care facilities and other specialized buildings 
TABLE 1 Decision matrix for implementing the Smoke Readiness Plan.
SMOKE CONDITIONSa
ANSWERS
ACTION
Currently smoky? 
Forecast to be smoky in the 
coming days?
No
No
Carry on with normal operations, and 
have your Smoke Readiness Plan 
prepared and ready.
Currently smoky? 
Forecast to be smoky in the 
coming days?
Yes
No
Consider implementing Smoke 
Readiness Plan.
Currently smoky? 
Forecast to be smoky in the 
coming days?
No
Yes
Consider implementing Smoke 
Readiness Plan.
Currently smoky? 
Forecast to be smoky 
tomorrow?
Yes
Yes
Implement Smoke Readiness Plan.
aTo find out more about local ambient air quality see AirNow.gov 
and state websites.3,4
Before Wildfire Season 
Develop a Smoke Readiness Plan
• Perform Maintenance on HVAC 
•  
Upgrade System Filter and Test HVAC 
• Optimize System Airflows
• Add Supplemental Filtration
•  
Create Ability to Assess Filter Conditions
• Limit Smoke Intrusion
•  
Add Ability to Monitor Indoor PM2.5
•  
Determine How to Create Temporary 
Cleaner Air Spaces
•  
Anticipate Sources of Indoor PM2.5
Wildfire Smoke
Test HVAC 
System in 
Smoke Ready 
Mode
Look for 
State/
Local Air 
Quality 
Alerts
Implement 
The Smoke 
Readiness 
Plan
Monitor the 
Effectiveness 
Of the Plan 
and Adjust
Operate 
In Smoke 
Ready Mode 
Until Smoke 
Subsides
FIGURE 2 Flowchart for making a building smoke ready.
Before Wildfire Season	
Wildfire Smoke
Develop Smoke 
Readiness Plan
(Modify/Maintain HVAC 
To Remove Smoke From 
Incoming Air, Prevent 
Infiltration, Monitor 
PM2.5, Plan Temporary 
Cleaner Air Spaces)
Test HVAC 
System in 
Smoke Ready 
Conditions
Is This System 
Able to: 1) Operate 
With MERV 13 
Filters?
2) Maintain
Positive Building 
Air Pressure?
Implement Smoke 
Readiness Plan
Are the Actions 
Reducing Indoor PM?
Operate in Smoke 
Ready Mode Until 
Smoke Subsides
Adjust Smoke 
Readiness Plan
Install a 
Lower Rated 
(Minimum 
MERV 11) 
Filter
Plan for 
Additional 
Temporary 
Cleaner Air 
Spaces
Check/Replace Filters, 
Look For/Fix Cracks 
in Building Envelope 
and Reduce Indoor PM 
Sources
Create Additional 
Temporary Cleaner Air 
Spaces
State/Local Air 
Quality Alert
If 
Not
If 
Not
MARCH 2021 
ashrae.org 
A S H R A E J O U R N A L
39
COLUMN IEQ APPLICATIONS
A S H R A E J O U R N A L 
ashrae.org 
MARCH 2021
40
COLUMN IEQ APPLICATIONS
should rely on qualified HVAC staff and consultants. 
Ideally, quick implementation of temporary measures 
will clean the air coming into the building and limit 
infiltration of wildfire smoke. Some buildings and HVAC 
systems are not designed and/or maintained to accom­
modate the modifications recommended in the planning 
framework. Appropriately sized portable air cleaners can 
help create temporary cleaner air spaces. However, build­
ing managers will need to assess whether these measures 
are sufficiently reducing the levels of particulate matter. 
The planning framework emphasizes assistance from an 
HVAC professional is generally required to assess existing 
HVAC equipment capabilities and implement portions of 
these recommendations.
Indoor air needs to be cleaned whether ventilating with 
outdoor air or recirculating indoor air. To help build­
ing managers accomplish this, the planning framework 
outlines a process for making a building smoke ready 
(Figure 1). Figure 2 provides a flowchart of actions within 
this process, including assessing whether these actions 
have been effective in reducing indoor PM2.5 levels. The 
planning framework explains how and why they should 
be taken before and during wildfire smoke episodes.
The planning framework emphasizes a Smoke 
Readiness Plan needs to be building-specific and 
address the following:
1.	 Purchase Smoke Preparation Supplies. Before wild­
fire season, purchase materials and supplies needed for 
the plan. For example, purchase portable air cleaners 
and extra filters in advance, as they may become dif­
ficult to find during a smoke event. Wildfire smoke can 
quickly load filters (Figure 3) and they may need to be 
changed as frequently as daily.
2. Upgrade HVAC System Recirculation Filter.
MERV 13 filters are recommended during smoke
events. However, prior to wildfire season, HVAC
systems must be assessed for the ability to function
properly with the upgraded filters.
3. Maintain the HVAC System. Repair broken
dampers, actuators and HVAC controls prior to fire
season. Pay special attention to the economizer because
they can be complex and may not be installed correctly
The economizer will need to be temporarily disabled.
4. Optimize System Airflows. Assess and maintain
adequate airflows that are protective of human health
and equipment health during smoke events. Prior to
wildfire season, determine an outdoor air intake level
that controls odor, temperature, indoor contaminant 
levels and maintains a positive building pressure 
consistent with the building and HVAC system design.
5. Prepare to Add Supplemental Filtration. During 
a smoke event, add additional filtration at the intake 
air vent where possible (Figure 4). A minimum of a 
MERV 13 filter on the outdoor air intakes will capture a 
large fraction of the PM2.5. Prior to fire season, inspect 
the air intake and make a list of filters, tape, temporary 
ducting materials and other items needed to mount filters 
to the air intake with minimal bypass around the filter.
6. Assess Filter Conditions. Prior to wildfire season,
add a port or pressure gauge to measure the filter
pressure drop on at least one air-handling unit. This
will simplify determining when to change filters.
7. Limit Smoke Intrusion. Prior to wildfire season,
weatherize the building envelope, including doors and
windows, to reduce infiltration by sealing and caulking
cracks. Keep doors and windows closed to limit smoke
intrusion.
8. Prepare to Monitor Indoor PM2.5. Prior to wildfire
. 
season, purchase one or more low-cost air monitors 
equipped with a PM2.5 sensor and install it in the 
facility.6 These monitors will not be as accurate as 
regulatory monitors but can show whether your 
interventions are reducing indoor PM2.5. For example, 
upward trends in PM2.5 levels can indicate that doors 
FIGURE 3 A clean filter (left) and a filter heavily loaded with wildfire smoke (right).
FIGURE 4 MERV 13 filter installed on an intake air vent.
A S H R A E J O U R N A L 
ashrae.org 
MARCH 2021
42
COLUMN IEQ APPLICATIONS
or windows are open, air filters are degrading or HEPA 
room air purifiers should be turned on. Make a plan 
for how the data from the monitor will be accessed and 
the actions that will be taken during a smoke event.
9. Determine How to Create Temporary Cleaner Air 
Spaces. Determine how to create temporary cleaner 
air spaces within the building prior to fire season. Use 
portable room air cleaners of the appropriate size for the 
room with HEPA filters (or other high efficiency filters) 
and other methods to clean the air (see discussion 
below). Some portable air cleaners come with indicators 
that change color as the air quality improves. If the 
cleaner does not come with an indicator function, it 
may be helpful to purchase a low-cost air monitor to 
determine whether the air is being cleaned. A low-
cost air monitor may also help verify that the air is in 
fact cleaner in the cleaner air space relative to other 
spaces in the building. Avoid models of air cleaners that 
produce ozone or generate ions (see list on California Air 
Resources Board website).7
10. Anticipate Sources of Indoor PM2.5. Cooking, 
vacuum cleaning, use of printers or copiers and 
smoking are examples of activities that increase indoor 
PM2.5 levels.8 Understanding potential sources in the 
building can assist in the reduction of these sources 
during wildfire or prescribed burn events.
The planning framework includes a full checklist to 
determine whether the building HVAC system is ready 
for smoke. A few issues include: Are outdoor dampers 
working correctly? Is the outdoor air economizer work­
ing and can it be shut off? Can the HVAC system use 
MERV 13 filters?
Pay Special Attention to Economizers
The planning framework urges special attention to 
economizers. Most rooftop units and larger HVAC sys­
tems are equipped with an outdoor air economizer. To 
save energy, the economizer uses outdoor air to replace 
the mechanical cooling system when temperatures 
allow. This can bring large amounts of smoke and partic­
ulate matter into a building during wildfire season. The 
economizer control also maintains a minimum outdoor 
air damper position for ventilation, controls relief fans 
and may close the outdoor damper when the building is 
unoccupied. Care and regular maintenance are recom­
mended to ensure the economizer operates as intended.
Numerous manufacturers and control schemes exist 
for economizers. Finding effective work-arounds to 
temporarily limit the economizer damper operation in 
response to wildfires is challenging. This framework rec­
ommends investigating what actions are needed to limit 
operations; this may include adding switches and con­
trol relays. Other work-arounds may also be required, 
such as placing the outdoor air damper in manual con­
trol and setting the position to allow the minimum air 
required for ventilation.
SARS-CoV-2
The planning framework recognizes that SARS-CoV-2 
raises additional challenges. While HVAC filtration and 
air cleaning recommendations for smoke and SARS-
CoV-2 are similar due to comparable respirable particle 
sizes, a low ventilation rate may be desirable for smoke 
control9 and, in contrast, a high ventilation rate may 
be needed to remove SARS-CoV-2 virus particles.10 The 
building manager’s challenge is to monitor system com­
ponents and indoor conditions and change system set­
tings as outdoor air quality changes to balance potential 
trade-offs between smoke and SARS-CoV-2 exposure. 
Portable air cleaners with a HEPA filter may be helpful in 
removing virus as well as smoke particles.
Portable Air Cleaners
If the HVAC system is not able to reduce the PM2.5 
concentrations sufficiently throughout the building or 
trade-offs are made to reduce potential SARS-CoV-2 
exposures, a cleaner air space is needed. A portable air 
cleaner with a HEPA filter (or other high efficiency fil­
ter), appropriately sized for the space, is recommended. 
Multiple devices may be needed for larger rooms. The 
Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers has 
developed a rating system and room size recommen­
dations for portable air cleaners. The smoke clean air 
delivery rate (CADR) is the rating for 0.09 to 1.0 micron 
particles and represents the amount of clean air deliv­
ered on the high-speed setting. Units with HEPA filters 
(or other high efficiency filters) and low noise ratings are 
recommended.11 
While do-it-yourself room air cleaners using a box fan 
and a MERV 13 furnace filter provide air cleaning simi­
lar to a small room (100 ft2 [9 m2]) air cleaner, they are 
noisier and should not be left unattended or placed near 
water.12 The framework also recommends reading and 
following the fan safety instructions.
43
Test the Smoke Readiness Plan Before Wildfire Season
When the Smoke Readiness Plan is prepared and before 
the start of wildfire season, the planning framework sug­
gests testing the HVAC system with the additional filtra­
tion and adjusted flow settings. Several non-functioning 
items may exist that will take more time to fix than 
emergency conditions allow. This test run, along with the 
additional preparations outlined in the planning frame­
work, should facilitate implementation of the Smoke 
Readiness Plan when smoke occurs. For optimal results, 
this framework suggests monitoring the effectiveness of 
the plan over the course of the smoke event. At the end of 
the wildfire season, any adjustments and lessons learned 
should be incorporated into the Smoke Readiness Plan 
to be better prepared for future smoke events. The full 
guideline will build upon this planning framework, fur­
ther fleshing out topics like design, installation and com­
missioning of the components of a smoke-ready building 
and system performance testing.
Acknowledgments
The planning framework was prepared and reviewed 
by a Work Group of the GPC 44P committee includ­
ing the following people: Tom Javins (Work Group 
Chair), University of Montana, Retired; Alison Clune, 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA); Randall 
Cooper, Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers; 
Steven Emmerich, U.S. National Institute of Standards 
and Technology; Michael Gallagher, Western Allied 
Corporation; Duane Hammond, National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health; Dr. Sarah Henderson, 
B.C. Center of Disease Control, Canada; Stacey Katz, 
EPA; Ann Kosmal, U.S. General Services Administration; 
Gregory Nilsson, National Research Council Canada; 
Gail Robarge, EPA; Emily Gibb Snyder, Ph.D., EPA; 
Rebecca J. Schmidt, Ph.D., University of California, Davis 
School of Medicine; David Schaaf, AAF Flanders; Kevin 
Teichman, Ph.D., EPA, Retired; Amanda J. Wheeler, 
Ph.D., Australian Catholic University.
Disclaimer
The views expressed in this article are those of the 
authors and do not necessarily represent the views or 
policies of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
References
1.	 U.S. National Interagency Fire Center. 2021. “Fire Info.” 
https://www.nifc.gov/fireInfo/nfn.htm
2.	EPA. 2019. “Wildfire Smoke: A Guide for Public Health 
Officials.” U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, with California 
Air Resources Board, California Office of Environmental Health 
Hazard Assessment, U.S. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention and U.S. Forest Service. https://tinyurl.com/14kztn7s
3.	EPA. 2021. AirNow website. U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency. https://www.airnow.gov/ 
4.	EPA. 2020. “Smoke Advisories.” U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency. https://tinyurl.com/th2ksm8z
5.	EPA. 2015. “Air Quality Guide for Particle Pollution.” U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency. https://tinyurl.com/y4dmkxnz
6.	LBNL. 2020. “Low-Cost Home Air Quality Monitors Prove 
Useful for Wildfire Smoke.” Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. 
https://tinyurl.com/y2tapla3
7.	 CARB. 2020. “Hazardous Ozone-Generating Air Purifiers.” 
California Air Resources Board. https://tinyurl.com/y4aldpde
8.	EPA. 2018. “Residential Air Cleaners: A Technical Summary.” 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. https://tinyurl.com/52qctoyr
9.	EPA. 2020. “Wildfires and Indoor Air Quality (IAQ).” U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency. https://tinyurl.com/5yaxs6kr
10. ASHRAE Epidemic Task Force. 2021.”Building 
Readiness.” ASHRAE. https://tinyurl.com/1mlbnl47
11. AHAM. 2019. “Find a Certified Room Air 
Cleaner.” Association of Home Appliance 
Manufacturers. https://tinyurl.com/y5hfahlf
12. Puget Sound Clean Air Agency. 2020. “DIY 
Air Filter.” https://tinyurl.com/y4do38zu 
https://bit.ly/3o6Pw0R
Rate this Column
Advertisement formerly in this space.
