PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
6.1 Maternal, Child, Adolescent, and Family Health
“The social foundations of children’s mental and physical health are threatened by the specter of 
far-reaching effects of unchecked climate change, including community and global instability, mass 
migrations, and increased conﬂict. Given this knowledge, failure to take prompt, substantive action 
would be an act of injustice to all children. A paradigm shift in production and consumption of 
energy is both a necessity and an opportunity for major innovation, job creation, and signiﬁcant, 
immediate associated health beneﬁts.”
– American Academy of Pediatrics, 20151 
 
Public Health 
Programs and 
Climate Change
Why Climate Change Matters for Maternal, Child, Adolescent, and Family Health
Climate change impacts on agriculture, built environments, family stability, and economic systems 
have adverse impacts on nutrition, physical activity, safety and security, ﬁnancial security, and social 
cohesion. Thus, climate change makes it more difﬁcult to promote healthy behaviors, healthy 
development, and healthy families and communities. Many climate solutions, including actions to 
promote clean air and healthy food and transportation options, offer signiﬁcant Maternal, Child, 
Adolescent and Family Health (MCAH) beneﬁts, including actions to promote clean air and healthy 
food and transportation options. (See Section 5—Health Beneﬁts)
• 
Infants, children, adolescents and perinatal women are among the most vulnerable to the 
health impacts of climate change, due to factors such as biological sensitivity, exposure, 
and adaptive capacity related to perinatal or age-related stages of development. Climate 
impacts, such as extreme heat and increased ozone levels, directly impact maternal, child, and 
adolescent health.
• 
Protecting children against harm and providing all children with opportunities for health 
are core goals of MCAH. As trusted, credible messengers who are knowledgeable about 
and committed to the wellbeing of children and families, MCAH professionals are uniquely 
positioned to enhance public and policymaker understanding about the impacts of climate 
change on women, children, and families, and to increase motivation for climate action.
Key Messages
106
106
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
What Local Health Departments Can Do
MCAH programs can integrate climate change into existing work and foster consideration of MCAH 
needs into the climate-related work of other agencies in their jurisdictions. MCAH programs can:
• 
Assess and map community vulnerabilities for climate-related MCAH impacts and enhance 
surveillance of climate-related diseases.
• 
Collaborate with agencies in other sectors such as schools, housing, public works, and parks to 
support policies and implement programs that reduce the risk of exposure to extreme heat, 
poor air quality, and infectious agents and vectors, and reduce climate pollution.
• 
Work with LHD Public Health Emergency Preparedness programs and emergency management 
agencies to ensure that MCAH populations are protected during extreme weather events.
• 
Inform the public and policy makers about the connections between MCAH and climate 
change, and the health and health equity beneﬁts of climate action. 
• 
Inform health care providers and patients about how climate change impacts MCAH and how 
to promote health in the era of climate change, including through using their voice to support 
climate solutions. 
Key Messages
Climate Vulnerability in Maternal, Child, and Adolescent Populations 
Pregnant women, infants, children and youth face greater vulnerability to climate change impacts due to their 
distinct biologically based sensitivities, exposures, and limited adaptive capacity.2  
Biological sensitivity and susceptibility3  
• 
Physiologic and immunologic changes in pregnancy make pregnant women more susceptible to climate-
related health impacts of heat, air pollution and infectious diseases.4  
• 
Innate physiological, anatomical, and developmentally based behavioral differences make infants and 
children more vulnerable to climate impacts. 
 
Children take in proportionally larger amounts of air, water and food, relative to their body 
weight and face higher risks for illness related to heat, ozone, toxic particulate air pollution, and 
zoonotic, water, and food-borne illnesses.5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13                  
 
Children’s small size, dependency and cognitive development increase their risk for injury, illness, 
death, adverse mental health consequences, and separation from caregivers following extreme 
events.14,15,16     
Greater exposures due to behaviors and environments 
• 
Children are more likely to be active outdoors, increasing their exposure to climate impacts such as air 
and water pollution, allergens, vector-borne diseases, and extreme heat.
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
107
107
Limited adaptive capacity 
• 
Children are less able to respond to hazards. They cannot independently evacuate in an extreme weather 
event or provide cooling on extreme heat days. Climate disasters also disrupt community resources on 
which children depend, such as schools.17,18  
How Climate Change Impacts Maternal, Child, and Adolescent Health 
Pregnant Women, Fetuses and Infants
• 
Extreme heat increases the risk of preterm birth, low birth weight, and infant mortality.19 
• 
Drought and ﬂoods are associated with:
 
Impaired access to safe and reliable water for drinking and sanitation, increasing risk of 
dehydration, preterm labor, and low birth weight20 
 
Increased risk for waterborne gastrointestinal illness, which is associated with adverse pregnancy 
outcomes including spontaneous abortion and preterm birth21 
 
Exposure to infectious agents, toxic pollutants, and mold. Exposure to mold or dampness during 
infancy is associated with persistent asthma through adolescence22 
 
Psychological stress, increasing risk of adverse outcomes, anemia, eclampsia, spontaneous 
abortion23  
New Orleans Department of Health 
Responds to Zika27,28
Beginning in May 2015, Brazil experienced a dramatic increase in cases of microcephaly. 
Investigators concluded that the cause was Zika virus, transmitted by the Aedes aegypti mosquito. 
Prenatal exposure to Zika also causes hearing loss, delayed growth and eye defects. 
Climate change contributes to changing mosquito distributions due to changes in precipitation 
and temperature, and A. aegypti is now found in many parts of the U.S., increasing the risks of 
a Zika outbreak if a traveler returned to the country with Zika. Like many other LHDs, the New 
Orleans Health Department (NOHD) responded quickly. Mosquito and Termite Control Board 
and NOHD brought clinicians, environmental specialists, and politicians together to develop a 
Comprehensive Zika Virus Plan that included a citywide education campaign on Zika and mosquito 
control, enhanced mosquito surveillance and collection for Zika testing, and case management and 
response. Pregnant women and clinicians received speciﬁc guidance on symptom recognition and 
screening for Zika, and a phone line provided information and referrals. When a pregnant woman 
returned to New Orleans with Zika infection, NOHD kicked into high gear. A door-to-door campaign 
provided neighborhood residents with information about how to protect against mosquito bites. 
Code enforcement and other city agencies did inspections to ﬁnd and remove any debris or small 
water collectors. Plans are in place for additional enhanced mosquito control—such as aerial and 
ground spraying and more intensive property inspections—should there be any conﬁrmed case of 
local transmission of Zika. 
108
108
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
• 
Air quality: Rising temperatures cause increased ground-
level ozone levels. Exposure to ozone and particulate 
matter is associated with increased risk for low-birth weight 
babies and infant mortality.24  
• 
Injury and violence: Domestic violence increases during 
both pregnancy and extreme heat events and with rising 
temperatures, placing women and fetuses at heightened 
risk for injury, death and adverse birth outcomes.25,26    
Children and Adolescents29  
• 
Heat: Children are particularly vulnerable to heat stress, 
especially under age one. Heat illness is the leading cause 
of death and disability among high school athletes. About 
120,000 U.S. children farm laborers are at risk for heat illness.
• 
Air Quality: 
 
Warmer temperatures increase ozone levels; climate change is also increasing stagnation events 
that create the worst ozone episodes.30  
 
Children are at greater risk from higher ozone levels due to higher respiratory rates and 
more time spent outdoors. Ozone has been associated with increased risk of asthma and ED 
admissions and pediatric ICU stays for asthma. 
 
Smoke from wildﬁres—laden with ﬁne particulate matter (PM2.5)—spreads over long distances, 
and is associated with increased risks of premature deaths, ED visits, and hospitalizations.31  
 
Warming climates increase the length and intensity of the allergy season.32  
• 
Infectious Disease: Climate change is increasing the risk of vector-borne diseases such as West Nile Virus 
and Lyme disease. Reported cases of Lyme disease are most common in 5–9 year old boys.33 
• 
Food Security: Over 13 million children in the U.S. were food insecure in 2016.34   Climate change 
threatens crop yields and other food production, food price increases, and higher levels of food 
insecurity35 (See Section 4.8—Food Security).
• 
Extreme weather events:
 
Children are at risk of illness, injury or death, separation from or loss of caregivers, and mental 
health consequences following extreme weather disasters, which are increasing in frequency and 
severity due to climate change. Following Hurricanes Katrina and Rita, more than 5000 children 
were separated from their families.36 
 
Flooding and extreme precipitation increase the risk for indoor mold exposure and related 
respiratory disease, and for diarrheal disease due to waterborne pathogens. 
 
Children and youth are at higher risk for severe mental health consequences after extreme events, 
and experience high rates of PTSD symptoms after natural disasters such as hurricanes and 
ﬂoods.37 When climate change exacerbates poverty and disrupts families and neighborhoods, it 
heightens impact on teen physical and mental health, behavior, and risky sexual behavior.38,39   
Children harvest an aubergine in Tainan, Taiwan
Michael Bish (CC BY-NC-ND 2.0)
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
109
109
 
Disruption of school and community resources due to climate disasters impacts children’s 
physical, mental and academic development. Children displaced from Hurricane Katrina 
demonstrated worse academic performance, school attendance, behavioral issues and mental 
health. Children need an estimated 4–6 months to recover academically following school 
displacement from severe weather events.40   
Climate Change and Children: A Global Snapshot
Climate change may cause an additional 25.2 million malnourished children if temperatures increase 
3–4°C, primarily due to crop yield reductions.41,42 Rising CO2 levels are associated with reductions in 
micronutrient content of staple crops like rice and wheat.43  
1.5 million children die from diarrheal disease annually, a number projected to increase signiﬁcantly 
due to climate change.44,45     
Lack of electricity is associated with worse health and educational outcomes.46 Approximately 3 
billion people use solid cooking fuels and kerosene in open ﬁres or inefﬁcient stoves.47 Exposure 
to household air pollution approximately doubles the risk for childhood pneumonia and is 
responsible for 45% of all pneumonia deaths in children under 5.48 A transition from fossil fuels to 
clean renewable energy for cooking and lighting will signiﬁcantly improve health, economic, and 
educational outcomes, especially in low- and middle-income countries.49  
Providing women and families with access to reproductive health services is a proven approach to 
improving the socioeconomic status of women and children, reducing the strain on the environment, 
and conserving resources. Universal access to contraception and empowerment of women are two of 
the most cost-effective ways to address both unsustainable population growth and climate change.50
“Conclusive evidence has demonstrated that that climate change is having a dramatic impact on 
the lives of people around the world. Representing physicians dedicated to the whole well-being 
of women—including their safety, security, and access to quality care—the American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists recognizes that climate change is an urgent women’s health concern 
as well as a major public health challenge. We call on our national and international leaders to act to 
curb greenhouse gas emissions and limit further climate destabilization. Without question, climate 
change has a disproportionate effect on global women’s health, as it broadens existing gender-based 
health disparities. The effects of climate change—such as food and water insecurity, civil conﬂicts, 
extreme weather events, spread of disease, and more—put women in affected regions at elevated risk 
of disease, malnutrition, sexual violence, poor mental health, lack of reproductive control, negative 
obstetric outcomes, and death. This also has an impact on future generations, with the rate of low-
birth weight infants increasing in regions impacted by the effects of climate change, and with the 
erosion of the health care infrastructure needed to support healthy women and healthy families. 
Moreover, as the effects of climate change continue to threaten the well-being of women across the 
globe, we ask that government and public health agencies take steps to ensure the protection of 
women’s health services and human rights.”
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 201651 
110
110
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Pregnant women, infants, children and youth face greater vulnerability to climate change impacts as 
a result of their distinct biologically-based sensitivities, exposures, and limited adaptive capacity.45,46 
Due to the intersection of race, poverty and chronic illness, low-income families and women and 
babies of color are at yet higher risk of the negative health impacts of climate change. 
Women of color are already at higher risk of adverse pregnancy and newborn health outcomes 
• 
The infant mortality rates for African American and Native American women are signiﬁcantly 
higher than those for non-Hispanic Whites.47,48    
• 
African-American women are more likely to be diagnosed with pre-pregnancy diabetes and 
hypertension.49 
• 
Uninsured, rural, American Indian/Alaska Native, and other women of color are more likely to 
receive late or no pre-natal care.50 
Children in low-income households and children of color already face a disproportionate burden of 
disease and pollution relative to children in wealthier households and White children.51 
• 
Black children are two times as likely to be hospitalized for asthma, four times as likely to die 
from asthma, and two times more likely to die from diabetes relative to White children.52,53   
• 
Puerto Rican children are twice as likely to have asthma, as compared to non-Hispanic whites.54 
• 
Children in neighborhoods with high levels of poverty visit the emergency room and are 
hospitalized for asthma at rates four times higher than those in wealthier areas.55 
• 
Latino children living in areas with high levels of air pollution have a heightened risk of 
developing Type 2 diabetes.56 
Extreme Heat 
• 
Low income and communities of color are more likely to be located in “urban heat islands” 
where nighttime temperatures may be as much as 22°F higher than surrounding areas. These 
areas often map onto areas of historical residential segregation.57 
• 
Low-income families report that the utility costs of operating and maintaining an air 
conditioner are a major barrier to staying cool during extreme heat.58 
• 
There may be as many as 500,000 employed child agricultural workers under age 18 in the U.S, 
at particularly high risk of heat illness and dehydration.59 Eighty percent of U.S. farmworkers 
identify as Hispanic.60 
Drought61 
• 
Low-income families are more vulnerable to food and water insecurity from rising food and 
water prices associated with drought and crop loss.62 
• 
Agricultural communities are more vulnerable to the adverse economic impacts of drought, and 
to the mental health impacts.63  
MCAH, Climate Change, and Equity
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
111
111
• 
Low-income rural communities are disproportionately reliant on small water systems or private 
drinking water wells, at increased risk of water shortages or exposure to contaminated well 
water; Native American communities are more likely to lack access to clean, potable drinking 
water than other groups in the U.S.64,65   
Flooding and Extreme Weather Events
• 
Low-income households are less likely to have disaster insurance, less able to recover from 
property loss associated with extreme events, and have fewer resources to relocate.66 
• 
Undocumented families are not eligible for FEMA assistance and even those who are eligible 
may fear applying. Immigrants may also have concerns about accessing evacuation shelters and 
other relief services due to inadequate cultural and linguistic competency of service providers, 
and undocumented immigrants may fear legal repercussions of seeking services.67 
• 
Extreme weather can interrupt treatment for asthma and other chronic illnesses due to 
displacement, power outages, stressed health systems, and high-demand for medical supplies.68,69 
 
 
• 
People with disabilities have high rates of illness, injuries, or death during extreme events, as 
cognitive, hearing, physical, and mobility impairments may impede safe evacuation.70 
• 
Low-income families are more likely to live in poor housing conditions, which can increase 
exposure to mold following ﬂooding and extreme weather events.71  
• 
Homeless children may occupy areas near creeks or rivers, making them more vulnerable to 
storms and ﬂoods.72 
Infectious disease73 
• 
Low-income families are more likely to live in blighted neighborhoods and sub-standard 
housing, placing them at increased exposure to vectors and higher risk of vector-borne disease 
due to lack of A/C conditioning and poor screening in houses or apartment buildings.74  
• 
Native American and Alaska Native communities more frequently lack access to clean, potable 
drinking water.75 Warmer water temperatures may exacerbate already-high rates of diarrhea-
associated hospitalizations for Native American and Alaskan Native children.76  
Air Quality77,78   
• 
Low-income households, people of color, and non-English speaking and foreign-born persons 
are more likely to live near busy roadways, and therefore face worse air quality. 
• 
Nearly 1 in 2 Latinos live in counties frequently violating clean air and ozone standards, 
exacerbating air quality issues, and Latino children are twice as likely to die from asthma as 
non-Latino Whites.79  
continued on next page
MCAH, Climate Change, and Equity continued
112
112
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
What Local Health Departments Can Do
Assessment and Surveillance
See Section 7.1—Surveillance 
Integrate climate and health risks into MCAH assessments:
• 
Identify and map areas with large populations of children ages 0–5.
• 
Map prevalence of tree canopy, parks and green space and impervious surfaces near schools and 
childcare facilities to assess heat risk. 
• 
Map busy roadways and stationary pollution sources and assess proximity to schools and childcare 
facilities to evaluate air pollution exposure.
• 
Identify neighborhoods at risk for vector-borne disease related to poor housing conditions and blight.
MCAH, Climate Change, and Equity continued
• 
Thirty-nine percent of the people living near coal-ﬁred power plants are people of color; 
seventy-eight percent of African Americans live within 30 miles of a coal-ﬁred power plant and 
a million African Americans live within half a mile of oil and gas operations.80,81   
Wildﬁre
• 
Communities and households at the wildland-urban interface where human-built environments 
are adjacent to areas of wildland vegetation are at greater risk of wildﬁres.82   
• 
Native American and Alaska Native populations living near forested regions are at increased 
risk of displacement, smoke-exposure, injury, and property loss, especially if more populated 
areas are prioritized for ﬁre management response.83 
• 
Children with asthma are at risk of disease exacerbations due to wildﬁre smoke and the 
emergency conditions created by wildﬁres disrupt ability to adequately manage asthma.
Food insecurity84,85   
• 
People of color and those living in poverty face higher rates of food insecurity. 
o 
22.5% of African American households and 18.5% of Hispanic households are food 
insecure, compared to 9.3% of White households.86 
• 
Women and children in indigenous communities that rely more on subsistence farming and 
ﬁshing are more vulnerable to climate change impacts on game, farming, and aquatic habitats.87
Mental health88  
• 
African Americans suffered higher rates of adverse mental health outcomes following 
Hurricane Katrina, with low-income individuals and people between the ages of 18 and 34—
especially single mothers—at particularly high risk.89,90    
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
113
113
Climate Change 
Impacts on 
Children’s Health
EXTREME WEATHER: Climate change increases the 
amount and severity of storms. Extreme weather can impact 
sanitation and sewer systems. This increases the risk of water-re
-
lated and gastrointestinal illnesses. Children are especially 
susceptible to such conditions due to their developing im
-
mune systems. Injury and mental health impacts are also 
common among children exposed to extreme weather. 
EXTREME HEAT: Climate change is increasing the 
frequency and intensity of extreme heat events.  
Children are less able than adults to regulate their body 
temperature. Thus, they are more vulnerable to changes 
in temperature. Compared to adults, extreme tempera
-
tures have led to more heat-related illnesses and deaths 
among children, especially infants. 
VECTOR-BORNE DISEASE: Insects and rodents 
that carry viruses respond quickly to changes in 
temperature and moisture, which can increase their 
growth and duration. Children are at risk for vector-borne 
illnesses due to their increased outdoor activity. They are 
also susceptible due to their developing immune 
systems. Lyme disease, hantavirus, dengue fever, 
and Zika virus are among the climate-related 
vector-borne diseases that pose a heavy health 
burden on children. 
POOR AIR QUALITY: Climate change 
extends the warm season and lengthens 
pollen season. It also increases the amount 
of airborne pollutants in the environment. 
 
Pollutants and pollen can have chronic 
impacts on children’s respiratory health, 
triggering allergies and asthma.
FOOD INSECURITY: Given changes in 
the weather due to climate change, 
crops will be afected by droughts  
and ﬂooding. Climate change also alters 
the nutrient quality of food. Together, these 
impacts could reduce access to food and 
nutrients. Poor nutrition can result in devel
-
opmental delays and adverse health outcomes 
for infants and children.
Stunted
nted
nted
ntedGrowt
rowt
r
h
Mal
Mal
Mal
Malnu
nu
nu
nutritio
tritio
tritio
trition
De
De
De
Dehydratio
ratio
r
n
Ly
Ly
L meD
yd
D
yd
i
yd
i
yd
sea
sea
sea
sease
Ha
Ha
Ha
Hanta
ta
ta
tavirus
Zika
ka
ka
kaViru
Viru
Viru
Virus
Ga
Gast
st
s roi
oi
oi
oi
roi
roi
roi
r nte
te
te
testina
stina
s
l 
Disorde
rde
r
rs
rs
r
Starvatio
Starvatio
Starvatio
Starvation
Asthm
sthm
sthm
sthm
sthma
Allerg
rg
r ies
APHA, American Academy of Pediatrics, Climate for Health, ecoAmerica 2017
Intersectoral Collaboration
• 
Work with housing, planning, building, 
home-visiting, sanitation and code 
enforcement agencies to identify and 
address climate-related risks. For example 
remove standing water in vacant 
properties, and encourage addition of 
window screens in rental properties and 
apartment buildings. 
• 
Collaborate with agricultural agencies, 
local food policy councils, schools, and 
local businesses and community-based 
organizations (CBOs) to build healthier, 
more sustainable and resilient local food 
systems (See Section 5.3—Agriculture). 
 
Support community and school 
gardens, urban agriculture, and 
acceptance of SNAP EBT and WIC 
at farmer’s markets. 
 
Promote food waste reduction 
(See Section 6.3—Environmental 
Health). 
• 
Collaborate with transportation, planning, 
parks and recreation agencies and schools 
to increase opportunities for safe active 
transportation, especially for children and 
youth, including Safe Routes to School, 
walking school buses, Complete Streets, 
trafﬁc calming and speed reduction, and 
lighting and shading on sidewalks and 
bike paths. Support reduced transit fares 
or free bus passes for students and youth 
(See Sections 5.1—Transportation and 
5.4—Urban Greening.). 
• 
Collaborate with parks, planning, and 
community-based organizations to expand 
tree canopy, urban greening, and park 
access and programming, especially for 
youth and children. 
114
LHD Spotlight: School Health
Schools, school districts, and school health programs are uniquely positioned to reduce the 
health impacts of climate change and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions through policies and 
programs to promote active transportation, energy efﬁciency, and local food procurement. LHDs—
in providing information and advice on student and schools health issues, and as school health 
providers—can encourage climate-friendly school practices and promote and protect student 
health in the era of climate change. 
• 
Provide information to schools, community colleges and PTAs about the climate-child health 
connection.
 
Encourage integration of climate change into school curricula.54   
 
Provide opportunities for students and families to participate in “community science” 
initiatives, such as temperature monitoring through iSeeChange.55 
 
Integrate green jobs planning and preparation into youth career development and 
training, such as retroﬁtting buildings to increase energy efﬁciency or installing 
renewable energy infrastructure.56  
• 
Work with schools, districts, PTAs, and school health and athletic programs to protect students 
from climate-related impacts
 
Ensure that training and protocols are in place to prevent heat-related illness.  
 
A 2018 Indiana law requires school coaches to undergo training for heat-related 
medical issues.57  
 
Connect school districts with emergency management agencies to ensure schools 
personnel participate in emergency management planning including for family support 
and academic continuity post-disaster.
• 
Encourage schools and school districts to implement policies and practices that promote health 
and address climate change, including: 
 
Active transportation for school children, youth and school staff (e.g. Safe Routes to 
School; bicycle safety and maintenance classes; and incentives for school employees to 
use active transportation (See Section 5.1 – Transportation).58,59,60        
 
Clean energy procurement and school energy efﬁciency measures61  
 
Healthy and sustainable food for school meals, including farm to school programs, 
school gardens, and reduction in meat consumption (See Section 5.3 – Agriculture).62,63     
 
Many schools have implemented Meatless Monday programs, see the Meatless 
Monday Implementation Guide64  
 
Food waste reduction through programs such as StopWaste65 or SavetheFood66  
Additional Resources
• 
Green Schools Alliance67 and Green Schools Initiative68  
• 
Sustainable Jersey for Schools69—model online initiative for health, climate, and sustainability
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
115
115
 
The Minneapolis Department of Health and Family Support partnered with the city’s Park and 
Recreation Board to create and implement programming in parks located in neighborhoods with 
high levels of violence, with staff going door-to-door in the surrounding neighborhoods to discuss 
the resident’s experiences and needs.52 
• 
Work with schools to integrate climate change into curricula, and encourage schools and childcare 
providers to provide information and resources to parents and students about climate change and the 
health beneﬁts of climate solutions, for example on local food systems, food waste reduction, and active 
transportation. 
• 
Work with schools, camps, and childcare providers to ensure plans are in place related to heat, air quality, 
waterborne and vector-borne disease and wildﬁre risks to children and adolescents.  
• 
Work with home-visiting agencies and other health care providers to refer clients for energy assistance 
(LIHEAP), weatherization, tree planting, and healthy home interventions to address mold remediation 
and safety violations.53  
• 
Collaborate with healthcare providers and systems to (See Section 6.6—Clinical Services):
 
Inform patients about climate risks.
 
Incorporate knowledge of climate impacts into patient care.
 
Make referrals for climate-related services. 
 
Serve as “climate and health champions” to educate community residents and decision makers 
about climate health impacts and support climate actions with health beneﬁts.
 
Work to reduce the carbon footprint of health care facilities. 
 
Ensure that health care systems are able to function during and after climate disasters.
Indigenous Day Native March to Transition to 100% Renewable Energy. 
Backbone Campaign, 2016
School Gardening Program
Amanda Lucidon, 2016 
116
116
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Preparing and Planning for Extreme Weather 
Events and Population Displacement 
Work with Public Health Emergency Preparedness 
programs to ensure that protocols are in place 
to provide shelter and assistance for MCAH 
populations in the event of climate-related disasters 
(See Section 6.5—Preparedness).
• 
Ensure safe and welcoming places for all 
types of families and for children and youth 
in evacuation centers.
• 
Prepare for and respond to the needs 
of pregnant and postpartum women, 
including post-disaster reproductive health 
assessments.70,71     
• 
Integrate family reuniﬁcation and 
educational continuity strategies into 
disaster planning.
• 
Encourage pediatric and women’s health 
care providers and pediatric mental health 
specialists to participate in Medical Reserve 
Corps and emergency response.
• 
Advise healthcare providers to monitor 
vaccine cold chain management during 
extreme heat events.
• 
Engage in recovery planning to promote rebuilding that supports families and child health and 
development, e.g. active transportation, parks, and complete neighborhoods.
Community Engagement and Education 
Work with community organizations to engage families and youth in public campaigns, school and community 
initiatives.
• 
Make information accessible to all
 
Provide information in all languages relevant in your community.
 
Make the information culturally appropriate.
 
Use multiple formats (print, radio, television, social media) and outlets (community events and 
meetings, worship services, and other venues). 
 
Use low-literacy formats.
 
Address the needs of those with communication impairments.
Adolescent Health 
and Positive 
Youth Development
Positive Youth Development involves social, 
emotional, and skills training to promote pro-
social norms and develop youth capacity for 
improved decision-making, communication, 
self-sufﬁciency, and self-determination, and 
fosters bonding with peers and responsible 
adults.85,86 PYD often involves community 
services—an opportunity for youth to engage 
on climate change that will impact them 
throughout their lives. Collaborate with youth 
community services programs to engage youth 
on climate and health issues, including through 
peer education and participation in climate 
action campaigns. See for example:
• 
SustainUS87   
• 
Youth Action on Climate Change88   
• 
iMatter89  
• 
Our Children’s Trust.90  
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
117
117
• 
Support families and youth organizations to get involved through community science initiatives and 
actions with health and climate beneﬁts, for example: 
 
Energy conservation campaigns such as “Turn It Off”72 or “Switch Off”73 or campaigns to reduce 
meat consumption “Meatless Mondays”74 or “Rethink Your Drink”75 for reduction of sugar-
sweetened beverages.
 
Local community science projects that engage and educate community members, such as the 
Chicago Botanic Garden BudBurst project that “brings together researchers, educators, gardeners, 
and citizen scientists” to learn how plants are affected by climate change.76   
• 
Provide information to parents, youth, and caregivers, about how to protect against climate-related  
health impacts:  
 
Check the Air Quality Index (AQI) for unsafe ozone and particulate levels during hot days and if 
wildﬁre smoke is present.77 
 
Prepare an emergency response plan for any extreme event.
 
CDC—Emergency Preparedness for Expectant and New Parents78 
 
American Academy of Pediatrics—Children and Disasters79  
 
Ready.gov—English80 and Spanish81  
 
Advise parents and childbearing age women on climate-related infectious disease risks and 
appropriate precautions.  
 
Take special care when preparing food in hot weather, and when eating outdoors without proper 
refrigeration for food.82  
 
Wear long sleeves and pants and insect repellent when outdoors near mosquito and tick habitats. 
Check for ticks after visits to grassy or forested areas. Use screens on windows and door at home 
to keep insects out. 
 
Recognize the symptoms of Lyme disease, Zika, and other infectious or vector-borne diseases.83 
 
Check with your provider before traveling to areas that may pose a Zika risk if pregnant or 
considering pregnancy.84 
 
Make the climate-health connection in education materials for patients, trainings for staff, and 
media messages whenever relevant, to increase public awareness that climate change is a health 
issue (See Section 8—Communications).  
 
Include climate and health information and messages in patient education and clinic materials on 
topics including Zika and other VBD, nutrition, water quality, air quality and heat.
 
Use Climate and Health posters91 
 
Include climate and health information in various program educational and training activities and 
in home visits.92 
118
118
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
 
Convene a public workshop or symposium on the issue, or partner with the PTA or school district 
to organize a workshop for parents focused on climate change and children’s health.
 
Organize grand rounds for MCAH health care providers on the connections between climate 
change and the health of women, children, and adolescents. 
• 
Integrate climate change messaging in routine program messaging, including health advisories, 
educational materials, and social media messages.
Nutrition
Original: Local food is fresher and tastes better than food shipped long distances from other 
states or countries. Fresher food is more nutritious.93
Modiﬁed: Local food is fresher, tastes better, and causes less climate pollution than food 
shipped long distances from other states or countries. Fresher food is more nutritious and 
better for the environment.
Original: Community gardens are a great way to learn about life and stay healthy too. Not 
only does gardening provide tasty, healthy foods, it teaches responsibility and patience.94
Modiﬁed: Community gardens are a great way to learn about life and stay healthy too. 
Not only does local gardening provide tasty, healthy foods, it teaches responsibility and it 
reduces climate pollution.
Emergency Preparedness
Original: Houston, Hurricane Season starts in 9 days. Now is time to prepare: Make a Plan, 
Build a Kit, Stay Informed, Know Your Neighbors.95
Modiﬁed: Houston, Hurricane Season starts in 9 days. Climate change is increasing the 
frequency and severity of extreme storms. Now is time to prepare: Make a Plan, Build a Kit, 
Stay Informed, Know Your Neighbors.
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
119
119
Heat and Children
Original: It is easy to get distracted. Look before you lock.96
Modiﬁed: It is never safe to leave a baby in the car when it’s warm outside, and climate 
change is making hot days more common. It is easy to get distracted. Never leave a baby 
alone in a hot car. Look before you lock.
Original: Babies and young children can become ill during very hot weather. Their health 
can be seriously affected by dehydration and need to drink plenty of ﬂuids to avoid 
becoming dehydrated.97 
Modiﬁed: Babies and young children can become ill during very hot weather, which is 
becoming more frequent due to climate change. Their health can be seriously affected by 
dehydration and need to drink plenty of ﬂuids to avoid becoming dehydrated.
Physical Activity
Original: Keep the kids active and safe this summer! Pima County’s Natural Resources, Parks 
and Recreation Department is offering online registration for its summer swim lessons.98
Modiﬁed: Our summers are getting hotter due to climate change. Keep the kids active and 
safe this summer! Pima County’s Natural Resources, Parks and Recreation Department is 
offering online registration for summer swim lessons.
Original: Walking, biking, and skateboarding are good for our physical and mental health.
Modiﬁed: Walking, biking, and skateboarding are good for our physical and mental health 
and create less air and climate pollution.
120
120
The San Luis Obispo County Department of Public Health (SLO-PHD)  launched their climate change and health 
communication campaign—OutsideIn SLO: We Take Health and Climate Change Personally—in 2014, in 
collaboration with the California Department of Public Health (CDPH). 
Integrating climate change into other LHD programs  
First, staff from health department programs (Public Health Nursing, Emergency Preparedness, and 
Environmental Health) were trained about the health impacts of climate change. Because women and children 
are particularly vulnerable to climate change, the SLO-PHD Health Promotion Division partnered with the 
Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) to produce a climate change curriculum that could be 
integrated into WIC classes. The 20-minute class, taught in English and Spanish by a dietician or public health 
educator, reached about 1400 families in 2014–2015 and over 1000 families in 2016. Although SLO-PHD attempted 
to evaluate whether the class impacted behavior, the response rate was too low to reach a ﬁrm conclusion. 
“We asked if the WIC clients thought climate change was an issue. They weren’t surprised about it 
and they were very accepting of the information. We found that Latinos were more aware and more 
knowledgeable going into it than the White population—most likely because of the drought. Many 
of the Latino families here have relatives in the Central Valley so they were dealing with layoffs, with 
drought, with no water in their homes, with food prices going up, and so it wasn’t like, ‘Oh, now we 
are going to talk about some random topic in our nutrition class.’”
Kathleen Karle, Division Manager—Health Promotion,
San Luis Obispo County Department of Public Health 
 
SLO-PHD also worked with a marketing ﬁrm to develop fact sheets on energy efﬁciency, climate-friendly travel, 
and eating locally grown fruits and vegetables. Distribution channels included farmer’s markets, community 
meetings, social media, and radio advertisements. In Summer 2017, SLO-PHD partnered with CDPH to host 
webinars on communicating climate change as a public health issue. The webinar series explored climate change 
and health storytelling, adaptation planning, health equity, and developing curricula. 
SLO-PHD is now integrating climate change into its reviews of the potential health impacts of projects under 
review by the county Planning department. The Healthy Communities Work Group, addresses the health and 
climate beneﬁts (or risks) of the projects.  
Raising Awareness  
About Climate Change: 
San Luis Obispo 
Department of Public Health  
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
121
121
121
• Develop climate change, health,  
and equity training curriculum for  
LHD staff. 
• Develop climate and health 
educational materials, including fact 
sheets, for the general public.
• Integrate climate change impacts and 
actions into established public health 
curricula and programs. 
• Incorporate climate and health 
considerations in intersectoral 
collaboration.
Key Action Steps:
“We talked to a lot of staff who saw climate 
change as an issue but at ﬁrst had a harder time 
connecting it to health. Once we started the 
conversation, they were totally on board with 
looking at the health co-beneﬁts and integrated 
messaging.”    
Morgan Feld, Community Wellness
Health Education Specialist
Lessons and Next Steps
While senior management is very supportive of the 
OutsideIn SLO campaign, limited funding and no 
dedicated staff person make it difﬁcult to expand this 
work. But a core group of committed staff continue 
to view their work through a climate and health 
lens, and now plan to incorporate climate and health 
education into school health classes. SLO-PHD found 
that staff training and messages that focus on health 
beneﬁts of climate action make it both feasible and 
fruitful to integrate climate change into existing public 
health work.
Learn More 
CDPH’s SLO case story and NACCHO Stories from 
the Field 
San Luis Obispo OutsideIn SLO
San Luis Obispo “Communicating Climate Change as a 
Public Health Issue” webinar 
San Luis Obispo CalBRACE Climate and Health Proﬁle 
 
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
122
122
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
6.2 Infectious and Communicable Disease Control
Controlling the spread of infectious disease is one of the most basic functions of public health, and a core 
mandate of local health departments. Climate change increases infectious disease risks and impacts population 
immunity and susceptibility to illness. Understanding climate impacts, their implications for the occurrence 
of infectious diseases, and population vulnerabilities will help LHD Communicable Disease Control programs 
prepare for climate-related infectious disease threats.
“…the incidence of most infectious diseases varies by season and geography—and that’s related to 
climate. So it makes sense to consider climate change as a possible contributor to many changes in 
the regional incidence of many communicable diseases. We need to be alert to that possibility, and 
prepared for it.”     
Matt Willis, MD, MPH, Health Ofﬁcer, Marin County, California
Why Infectious and Communicable Disease Control Should Care
• 
Vector, food, water, and air-borne infectious disease risks are all impacted by climate change 
through multiple pathways, including increases in air and water temperature, the occurrence of 
extreme weather events, and human responses to climate change, such as migration. 
• 
Climate change also impacts immunity and susceptibility to illness, as populations become 
more vulnerable to food insecurity, chronic illness, and health system disruptions due to 
extreme weather events.1 Individual characteristics and social and economic inequities place 
some individuals and communities at greater risk than others for infectious disease. Outdoor 
work, substandard and crowded housing, neighborhood blight, and outdated and failing 
infrastructure increase vulnerability. Indigenous communities reliant on aquatic food harvesting 
and homeless and displaced populations are also at higher risk.
 What Infectious and Communicable Disease Control Can Do
• 
Enhance vector-borne and infectious disease surveillance systems—through adjustment of 
location, frequency, and methodologies—to address changes in infectious disease risk levels and 
characteristics.
• 
Develop infectious disease prevention and rapid response plans to reduce the risk of epidemics 
associated with extreme weather events or in response to case reports, for example of Zika.
• 
Collaborate with agencies in other sectors such as housing and public works to reduce the risks 
of exposure to infectious agents and vectors.
• 
Provide information to health care providers, community residents, and decision makers about 
the increasing risks of climate-sensitive infectious diseases and measures to protect against them.
Key Messages
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
123
123
APHA, Climate Nexus 2016
124
124
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
How Climate Change Impacts Infectious and Communicable Disease Control 
Climate change is increasing the risk of infectious disease, including vector, food, water, and airborne diseases. 
Vector-borne Disease and Climate Change
Climate change is causing warmer temperatures, changes in precipitation, and sea level rise that impact the 
habitat distribution, seasonality, mating and reproduction cycles, and competence of disease-carrying mosquitos, 
ticks, and mice, increasing the risks of exposure to disease in some areas.2 
• 
Drought can bring mosquitos in closer contact with humans by forcing them to move toward domestic 
water sources due to water scarcity and reducing rain-fed “wash out” of their underground habitats.
• 
From 2004 to 2016 there was a 300% increase in reportable vector-borne disease in the U.S., including a 
2-fold increase in reported tick-borne diseases.3 
• 
Sea level rise causes shifts in population densities, agricultural practices, water use, housing conditions, 
and vector reservoirs, which could increase vector-borne disease (VBD) in impacted areas.4 
• 
Climate-driven human behaviors can augment VBD spread and exposure, e.g. inadequate window 
screening, water storage in open outdoor containers, and poor swimming pool maintenance. 
• 
Climate change may alter Hantavirus (HPS) transmission risk; deer mice—the main vector—proliferate 
when vegetation grows after high precipitation, but come into proximity with humans as they seek water 
during drought.5 
Foodborne Disease and Climate Change
There are an estimated 48 million cases of foodborne illness in the U.S. each year, with over 120,000 
hospitalizations and nearly 3,000 deaths.6 
• 
Higher ambient temperatures increase the replication cycle of foodborne pathogens such as salmonella, 
campylobacter, or E.coli, increasing disease risk.7 Warm weather encourages outdoor eating and picnics, 
with risk of leaving food unrefrigerated for too long.8 
• 
Onsite container refrigeration, truck-trailer refrigeration, cold storage, and food retail display cases are all 
susceptible to heat stress and power outages; a breach in temperature control can increase contamination.9
• 
Increasing drought can also increase the risk for foodborne illness, as water for basic sanitation  
becomes scarcer.10 
• 
Higher temperatures and water-logged pastures following extreme storms may lead to increased indoor 
housing of livestock, which could increase zoonotic exposures for workers, proliferation of antibiotic 
resistant bacteria, and food and water contamination.11,12    
• 
Heavy rainfall may increase risk of contamination of irrigation water or produce.13 
Waterborne Disease and Climate Change
• 
There are an estimated 12 to 19 million endemic cases of waterborne illness in the U.S. each year, 50% of 
which are associated with extreme rainfall (See Section 4.7—Storms and Flooding).14
• 
 Flooding of water and sewage treatment facilities increases the risk of waterborne disease.15 
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
125
125
• 
Heavy rainfall can overwhelm “combined” sewer systems (collecting both sewage and storm water 
runoff) with release of untreated waste into surrounding water bodies.16  
• 
Warmer water temperatures, in both ocean and freshwater sources:
 
Allow for greater proliferation of microorganisms that can cause serious gastrointestinal illness.17 
 
Foster the growth of harmful algal blooms (HAB), associated with exposure to dangerous, 
potentially fatal, toxins. Algal growth also increases with higher CO2 levels.18,19   
 
In summer of 2015, an unprecedented HAB stretched from Alaska to the California coast, 
leading to extensive ﬁsheries shutdowns to prevent exposure to algae-produced domoic 
acid, which can cause life-threatening Amnesic Shellﬁsh Poisoning if consumed.20 
 
Recent studies have found that harmful algal blooms contribute signiﬁcantly to methane 
emissions, further contributing to global climate change.21
Airborne Illness and Climate Change
Wind, especially in conjunction with dust, can increase concentrations of airborne bacteria, viruses, and 
fungi.22,23 High temperatures and drought increase soil dry-out and dust, which in arid areas like U.S. Southwest 
can carry Coccidioides immitis fungal spores that can cause Valley Fever when inhaled.24 
• 
California experienced a ﬁvefold increase in Valley Fever cases between 2000–2011, and in Arizona in 
2018, the total number of recorded cases as of March was 2,461, compared to 1,360 over the same  
period in 2017.25,26     
Colorful anti Zika poster decorates the sidewalk during a campaign in 
Ipanema. lazyllama / Shutterstock.com
Mosquito Spray
Fairfax County/ﬂickr.com 
126
126
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Climate Change, Infectious Disease, and Health Equity 
• 
Occupation: Farm workers and other outdoor laborers are at greater risk for exposure to vector- and air-
borne illness.27  
• 
Housing and Neighborhood Conditions: Lack of window and door screens can increase exposure to 
vector-borne disease. Poor neighborhoods have more mosquitos because they have more abandoned 
properties and more trash that pools water to harbor mosquito larvae.28 
• 
Poor Infrastructure: People living in neighborhoods with aging water and sewer infrastructure may be at 
greater risk of sewer overﬂows and water-borne disease after ﬂooding.29 
• 
Race and Ethnicity: African Americans and Filipinos are at higher risk of illness following exposure to 
Coccidioidomycosis.30 
• 
Indigenous Communities: Communities with greater reliance on traditional food resources, such as 
shellﬁsh, are at higher risk due to the increase in pathogens associated with rising ocean temperatures.31 
• 
Insurance Status: Those without insurance are at greater risk of delaying care or receiving insufﬁcient 
health care.32  
• 
Chronic Illness: Those with compromised immune systems are more susceptible to infectious diseases.33  
• 
Displaced Populations: People displaced by climate change and extreme weather events are at higher 
risk due to crowded and poor quality living conditions, and limited healthcare access.34 
What Local Health Departments Can Do 
Local health departments’ infectious disease control strategies need to evolve to address the shifts in disease 
dynamics associated with climate change.35 This will require: 1) assessment and surveillance, 2) preparedness 
and planning for extreme events and related displacement, 3) collaboration with other departments and agencies, 
and 4) increased outreach and education for the public and health professionals. Recommendations for speciﬁc 
infectious disease categories follow the general recommendations below.
Across Programs
Assessment and Surveillance
Surveillance is critical for the identiﬁcation and control of climate-sensitive infectious diseases and the factors 
contributing to their spread.36 Current vector-borne and infectious disease surveillance systems may be enhanced 
to ensure adequacy in the era of climate change. For example, vector monitoring may change as habitats and 
distribution of tick, mosquito and rodent species shift in seasonality, geographic range, and concentration due to 
climate change (See Section 7.1—Surveillance). 
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
127
127
Assessment
Work with your LHD epidemiology and surveillance staff, local climate scientists, vector control agencies, and 
others to identify populations vulnerable to climate-sensitive infectious disease, including:
• 
Baseline demographic and socioeconomic data
• 
Baseline incidence of climate-sensitive infectious diseases
• 
Baseline prevalence of vectors and reservoirs
• 
Nature and magnitude of travel and immigration patterns 
• 
Climate risks for your jurisdiction
• 
Neighborhoods at higher risk for ﬂooding, sea level rise, heat 
• 
Neighborhoods at risk due to housing conditions, blight, sewage and storm water overﬂow
• 
Risks associated with land use and land cover (e.g. grazing near recreational waters, wetlands) 
• 
Households using private or very small system wells
• 
Indigenous populations at risk due to reliance on local food sources (e.g. shellﬁsh harvest)
Surveillance 
• 
Modify surveillance, enhance data analysis, and prepare for case response and investigation based on 
anticipated changes in infectious disease risk.
• 
Enhance syndromic surveillance in hospital emergency departments to include febrile illness.
• 
Forecast disease outbreaks: Combine environmental data, meteorological forecasts, and information 
on disease incidence to develop models that can forecast high risk of disease and information for early 
warning systems.37,38   
Intersectoral Collaboration
Look for opportunities to work across departments to address the impacts of climate change on infectious 
diseases and to ensure that actions prioritize low-income communities and vulnerable populations. For example, 
housing, sanitation, and public works agencies can implement strategies to reduce standing water that provides 
breeding habitat for mosquitos; environmental health agencies can educate food retail workers on strategies to 
reduce food-borne illness risks with rising temperatures; housing, building, and zoning agencies, can address 
factors in the built environment that impact vector habitat, such as rain water harvest systems, abandoned 
swimming pools, outdoor tire sales, or window screens. 
Work with health care providers and facilities to ensure recognition and reporting of climate-related infectious 
diseases:
• 
Educate providers on anticipated climate impacts, the connection to infectious disease, screening, 
diagnosis, and treatment of climate-sensitive diseases.
• 
Emphasize the importance of reporting new cases of climate-sensitive infectious illness or any unusual 
occurrences or patterns of illness to the LHD.
• 
Provide patient education materials for distribution through provider ofﬁces.
128
128
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Preparing for Extreme Weather Events and Population Displacement 
Climate change will increase the risk of extreme events throughout the country, whether through extended 
periods of extreme heat, prolonged droughts, or the intensiﬁcation of storms and ﬂooding. Communicable 
disease risk after natural disasters is associated most closely with the extent of population displacement and the 
characteristics of the communities displaced.39 Access to safe drinking water, food, and healthcare will impact 
potential transmission following displacement, as will interrupted waste management services, limited shelter for 
displaced populations, the underlying health status of the population affected, and underlying rates of disease 
transmission.40,41   
• 
Public outreach: Proactively plan for potential challenges pertaining to outreach, language and cultural 
barriers, legal status (immigration status, age, guardianship/vulnerable adults), and risky occupational 
situations. 
 
Prepare working drafts of public education/alerts/communications for distribution during 
extreme events (e.g. boil water orders, ﬂood water precautions).
 
Establish an accessible information hotline for residents with multiple language options. 
 
Ensure messaging regarding infectious disease prevention following a disaster is broadcast on 
local TV and radio stations in multiple languages and is accessible for people with disabilities.
• 
Educate providers about infectious disease risks associated with climate change and with climate-related 
extreme weather events. For example, inform providers about increased risk of infection in people with 
direct contact with ﬂoodwaters.42 
• 
Work with Public Health Emergency Preparedness (PHEP) to ensure availability of sanitation facilities, 
hand washing facilities with soap and water, operation procedures and operator training, community 
outreach and education in case of extreme weather events  that disrupt water supplies and sanitation 
systems. See CDC’s Potential Sanitation Solutions during an Emergency Response.43 
• 
Work with your PHEP program to ensure that plans are in place for immunizations for evacuees and 
displaced persons following a climate-related disaster.
 
See the CDC’s recommendations on immunizations following natural disasters and extreme 
weather.44  
 
Inform Medical Reserve Corps of recommendations for tetanus and HepB vaccines for disaster 
responders.45  
 
Develop protocols for onsite tuberculosis screening, immunization and/or treatment following 
extreme events (e.g. in evacuation shelters).
 
Prepare for enhanced medication and vaccine cold chain monitoring and protection as extreme 
events and heat will potentially disrupt electricity production for proper refrigeration. 
 
Ensure providers safely store vaccines (and other medications) in the case of a power outage.46 
• 
Keep policies and permissions up-to-date (e.g. with regards to quarantine, triaging and housing of 
displaced populations).
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
129
129
Community Engagement and Education
• 
Engage communities through participation in “community science” programs that address climate- 
related infectious disease risks. For example, researchers in Texas established a citizen science program to 
monitor distribution and infection prevalence of the “kissing bugs” that transmit the parasite that causes 
Chagas disease.47 In Southeast Alaska, the Sitka Tribe’s Southeast Alaska Tribal Ocean Research (SEATOR) 
program monitors for harmful algal species whose toxins can accumulate in shellﬁsh.48 
• 
 Work with community organizations throughout the development and distribution of outreach and 
educational materials to ensure that all residents receive information about infectious disease risks: 
 
Use multiple formats (e.g. print, radio, television, social media) and outlets (e.g. community 
events and meetings, worship services, and other venues) See Climate Change and Lyme Disease.49 
 
Provide information in all languages relevant in your community, use low-literacy formats, and 
address the needs of those with communication impairments. See HealthReach for materials in 
many languages.50 
Vector-Borne Illness
Assessment and Surveillance
Consider changes in the frequency or location of surveillance to detect changes in the presence of disease-
carrying vectors and vector-borne disease in animal hosts.51 Surveillance for different mosquito species may 
require changes in trapping location, time of day, and trap type.
• 
Notify vector control or your state health department of identiﬁcation of mosquitoes tentatively identiﬁed 
as Aedes aegypti or Aedes albopictus; send specimens to conﬁrm identiﬁcation.52 
• 
Work with housing and code enforcement agencies to acquire data on vacant and blighted properties to 
identify and map vulnerable neighborhoods for targeted education and vector habitat control.53 
• 
Assess projected burden of vector-borne disease using current surveillance data and climate projections, 
using VBD models and decision support tools.54  
• 
Prepare a plan for follow-up of suspected and conﬁrmed cases of dengue, chikungunya, or Zika infection: 
 
Rapid notiﬁcation to the local vector control agency to launch targeted mosquito surveillance and 
control activities.55  
 
Case follow-up and management protocols.
 
Protocols and responsibilities for sharing information about human cases of dengue, chikungunya, 
and Zika.
Intersectoral Collaboration
Collaborate with public works, housing, zoning, and building agencies to upgrade codes and enforcement
• 
Require screens on home doors and windows, including rental properties and multi-family housing.
• 
Ensure that rain water collection systems include adequate screening. 
Train building inspectors, sanitation workers, code enforcement workers and others to look for even small 
amounts of standing water to prevent vector reproduction.
130
130
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
• 
In August 2016, following the announcement of several locally transmitted Zika cases, Miami-Dade 
County Department of Health collaborated with city sanitation workers who ﬂushed standing water, 
sprayed streets with 250-degree water, and removed trash to eliminate potential breeding sites.56  
Work with parks and recreation and water departments to implement strategies (e.g. tree planting) to reduce 
water temperature and standing water in parks and recreation areas to reduce vectors.57 
Work with vector and animal control agencies:
• 
Prepare for the introduction and spread of mosquito species that may be new to your jurisdiction  
(e.g. Aedes Aegypti).58 
• 
Conduct enhanced monitoring of Aedes and Culex mosquitoes, dead birds and sentinel chickens after 
extreme precipitation and ﬂooding and during drought.59 
• 
Collaborate on an outreach plan that can be implemented at the ﬁrst detection of invasive Aedes 
mosquitoes.60  
For LHD home visit programs, support Public Health Nursing and Maternal Child Health to integrate patient 
education and assessment of vector-borne disease risks into home visits (e.g. window and door screens, standing 
water), along with referrals for code enforcement and weatherization services.
LHD Spotlight: 
Tulsa City-County Health Department
With increasing temperatures and changing precipitation patterns in the region, the Tulsa City-
County Health Department in Oklahoma was concerned about the spread of Aedes aegypti 
mosquitos, known to transmit Dengue, Chikungunya, Zika, and Yellow Fever viruses. The 
department’s Environmental Health Services (EHS) team wanted to enhance its program to 
proactively monitor for local Aedes aegypti and to educate the community about vector control 
and VBD.
Adam Austin, Environmental Specialist for the Tulsa City-County Health Department, commented: 
“We didn’t realize when we started how steep the learning curve would be—not only did we have 
to learn how to use new traps, but it took some time to learn when and where to place the traps 
to yield the best information. This mosquito just does not behave the same way as the mosquitos 
we’ve mainly been concerned about in the past.”61 
Once the department developed a monitoring protocol, they created maps of the distribution of 
Aedes aegypti in the region, measuring against variables like locations of standing water, soil type, 
seasonal ﬂooding, and economic hardship quartiles. They worked with the city to consider new 
standards for screens on windows/doors and enforce existing screen requirements and prohibition 
of the sale of tires (notorious mosquito breeding receptacles) within 300 feet of residential 
properties, as well as consideration of a new requirement that tires stored outdoors be covered.
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
131
131
Community Engagement and Education
Integrate climate change into routine informational materials.
Zika
Original: Residents of the Rio Grande Valley should remain on alert for Zika and take 
precautions even during winter months because it often stays warm enough for mosquito 
activity to continue through the winter.62
Modiﬁed: Residents of the Rio Grande Valley should remain on alert for Zika and take 
precautions even during winter months. As climate change is causing milder winters, 
mosquito activity is more likely to continue through the winter.
Foodborne Illness
Assessment and Surveillance
Consider implementation of syndromic surveillance for food-borne illness during heat waves or following 
signiﬁcant power outages.
Intersectoral Collaboration
Environmental Health
• 
Work with food facility inspectors to ensure that food handlers and preparers are informed about climate-
related risks of food-borne illness.
• 
Increase frequency of retail food inspections (and incorporate education addressing heightened risk of 
food-borne illness with higher temperatures).
• 
Monitor water temperature in areas of seafood and shellﬁsh harvest.
• 
Monitor seafood and shellﬁsh for Vibrio bacteria with high water and ambient air temperatures.
Community Engagement and Education 
Integrate climate change into public information.
Foodborne Illness
Original: Due to factors including warmer temperatures, foodborne illness increases in 
summer. Stay healthy and safe during warmer months by following these food safety 
recommendations.63
Modiﬁed: Foodborne illness increases in summer due to factors including warmer 
temperatures, and climate change is making temperatures even warmer. Stay healthy and 
safe during warmer months by following these food safety recommendations.
132
132
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Waterborne Illness 
Assessment and Surveillance
Assess the need for increased frequency and more locations for monitoring of water quality.
• 
Consider implementation of syndromic surveillance for water-borne disease following extreme 
precipitation and ﬂooding.
Map outlet sites for combined sewer and storm water systems to identify neighborhoods at risk due to extreme 
precipitation and ﬂooding events. 
Intersectoral Collaboration 
Advocate for building codes that encourage the use of gray water, and work with Environmental Health and 
building inspectors to ensure prevention of cross-contamination in water sources used for drinking or vegetable 
garden irrigation.
Support parks and public works to build swales and rain gardens, and plant more trees near waterways to 
prevent ﬂooding and runoff and reduce water temperature (See Section 5.4—Urban Greening).64 
Work with local and regional water quality control districts, water utilities, and watershed managers:65  
• 
Assess water quality monitoring protocols and potential need for enhancement. 
• 
Strengthen regulations and enforcement to prevent water contamination.
Encourage planning, public works and building permit agencies to require the use of permeable material in new 
paved areas to prevent ﬂooding and runoff.66 
Preparing for Extreme Weather Events and Population Displacement
Support the regional Water Board and Environmental Health to plan for alternative water sources for drinking 
and hygiene following ﬂooding or extreme precipitation. 
Community Engagement and Education
Engage residents in community science programs, for example to increase monitoring for harmful algal bloom 
through collection of cyanobacteria and toxin data. See the Eel River Recovery Project68  
Integrate climate change into educational messages about waterborne illness.
Harmful Algal Blooms
Original: When conditions are favorable (such as an increase in water temperature and 
available nutrients) algae can produce algal blooms67 
Modiﬁed: When conditions are favorable (such as an increase in water temperature and 
available nutrients) algae can produce algal blooms. Warming temperatures and waters due 
to climate change are increasing the likelihood of these favorable conditions for blooms.
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
133
133
Airborne Illness
Assessment and Surveillance
Partner with health care providers in endemic areas to report all Valley Fever cases, especially during and 
following periods of drought. 
Intersectoral Collaboration 
Collaborate with County Agricultural Commissioners and local growers and construction businesses to implement 
safety training in multiple languages and low literacy formats for agricultural and construction workers to prevent 
Cocci exposure and Valley Fever infections.
Work with local air quality control districts and occupational safety and health agencies to increase outreach on 
measures to reduce dust. 
In Valley Fever endemic areas, collaborate with local ﬁre agencies to inform wildland ﬁreﬁghters about 
prevention of coccidiodomycosis.69  
Provide employers in Valley Fever endemic areas with information about reducing risk, and employer 
requirements to reduce dust exposure and report Valley Fever cases.70 See Preventing Work-Related 
Coccidioidomycosis  
(Valley Fever).71  
Community Engagement and Education
Conduct outreach and provide linguistically and culturally appropriate information about Valley Fever to outdoor 
workers in endemic areas. See this Valley Fever handout in Spanish.72 
For More Information
CDC Infectious Disease Sites: 
• 
Valley Fever73  
• 
West Nile Virus74 
• 
Dengue Fever75 
• 
Lyme Disease76 
• 
Zika77
134
134
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
6.3 Environmental Health Services 
Public Environmental Health (PEH) agencies are responsible for addressing food, water, recreational health, 
hazardous materials, solid waste and waste management, indoor and outdoor air quality, housing, noise, body 
art, medical waste, and emergency preparedness.  Environmental Health Specialists may be licensed to inspect 
and enforce laws at restaurants and markets, temporary food facilities, food warehouses, licensed housing and 
swimming pools at apartments and condominiums, pet food stores, theaters, and self-service laundries. PEH 
agencies handle sanitation complaints and educate the public about  protecting against environmental health 
risks. Local PEH programs often work closely with agencies that address air quality and vector control. 
Why Public Environmental Health Should Care
• 
Virtually every area in which local public environmental health programs (PEH) are involved is 
impacted by climate change, including water, air, food, housing, and waste infrastructure.
• 
Climate change exacerbates many of the environmental risks that PEH endeavors to reduce and 
control. PEH agencies are uniquely positioned to help minimize the risks associated with climate 
change, and in several areas, your PEH routine activities and emerging responsibilities can help 
mitigate climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions from various sources.
 What Public Environmental Health Can Do
• 
Enhance surveillance and laboratory capacity to address changes in food and waterborne  
illness risk. 
• 
Collaborate with agencies in other sectors such as parks, public works, and local air quality 
management districts to manage climate-related risks and impacts.
• 
Augment regulatory practices in order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and climate  
related risks. 
• 
Work with Public Health Emergency Preparedness to include environmental health concerns in 
emergency response and recovery planning.
• 
Inform the regulated community, partner agencies, and community residents about the 
increasing risks of climate-related food and waterborne illness and measures to protect  
against them.
Key Messages
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
135
135
How Climate Change Impacts Public Environmental Health 
Food Safety and Climate Change 
See Section 4.8—Food Security
• 
Higher ambient temperatures increase the replication cycle of food-borne pathogens such as salmonella, 
campylobacter, or E. coli, increasing disease risk.
• 
Extreme weather events can prevent transportation of food products, disrupt food supply chains, increase 
loss due to spoilage, and increase risk of breaches at any stage of the food cold chain, with resultant food 
contamination.
• 
Reduced access to water for basic sanitation during drought may increase the risk of food-borne illness.6 
Environmental Justice
“Environmental justice is the right of all people and communities to live, work, and play in a 
clean and safe environment”
– Environmental Health Coalition 
Environmental justice calls for:1  
• 
recognition of and a halt to imposition of disproportionate environmental harm on low income 
communities and communities of color
• 
opportunity for full inclusion of community residents in decisions that affect their communities
• 
striving to achieve, environmentally healthy and economically sustainable communities.
Communities of color and low-income communities are disproportionately impacted by 
environmental hazards, including air pollution and other toxics exposures, living with a cumulative 
environmental burden that stems from a legacy of land use, planning, and infrastructure investment 
decisions that have placed them in harm’s way due to proximity to transportation infrastructure, 
industrial facilities, hazardous waste sites, and industrialized agricultural operations. Historical 
disenfranchisement, lack of social and economic power, environmental racism, and the policies and 
activities of governments, corporations, and other institutions contributed to this burden.2 
These risks are exacerbated by climate change, leading to the “Climate Gap”—“disproportionate 
and unequal implications of climate change and climate change mitigation” for “people of color 
and the poor.”3 For example, people of color and low income people often live in neighborhoods 
with higher levels of air pollution, have higher asthma rates and are more impacted by rising 
ozone levels due to warmer temperatures.4,5   
Through proactive engagement with disadvantaged communities, PEH can better integrate equity 
considerations into PEH practice and help to both redress environmental injustice and build  
climate resilience. 
136
136
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Vector Control and Climate Change 
See Section 6.3—Infectious Disease
Climate change is causing warmer temperatures and precipitation changes that 
• 
impact the habitat, geographical range, and mating cycles of disease-carrying mosquitoes and ticks;7,8   
• 
foster earlier seasonal onset and longer seasons for vector borne disease transmission;9,10     
• 
accelerate pathogens and mosquito reproduction, shorten disease incubation time in mosquitoes; and11  
• 
increase droughts that may create stagnant water (e.g. poorly ﬂushed sewers) that breeds mosquitos.12,13    
Water Access and Quality and Climate Change
Rising sea levels (especially coupled with  drought) can result in signiﬁcant salt-water intrusion, rendering fresh 
water undrinkable without signiﬁcant treatment and reducing access to safe drinking water.14  
Severe drought may reduce water access and limit water for sanitation and hygiene. 
Drought increases the concentration of harmful contaminants in ground and surface waters, such as industrial 
chemicals, heavy metals, and nitrates from fertilizers.
• 
Increased reliance on groundwater during drought may increase toxics exposure. 
• 
Land subsidence puts infrastructure like roads and levees at risk of permanent damage.15 
Climate change increases the risk of illness related to recreational water use.
• 
Increased sea and freshwater temperatures increase frequency and severity of toxic Harmful Algal Blooms 
(HAB) associated with respiratory, gastrointestinal and neurological problems.16  
• 
Increased water temperatures are associated with more growth of virulent strains of Vibrio bacteria (e.g. 
V. cholerae).17 
In many poor, rural communities access to clean, safe drinking water is already tenuous, further threatened  
by drought. 
• 
Every year from 1982 to 2018, 3–10% of water systems in the U.S. were in violation of federal Safe 
Drinking Water Act health standards.18 
 
In 2015, 21 million Americans were likely drinking from unsafe water sources.19 
 
The most U.S. violations clustered in Oklahoma and West Texas.20 
• 
For communities reliant on groundwater for drinking water, contamination has far-reaching health 
impacts.21 
Solid Waste and Climate Change
Extreme weather events associated with climate change may damage solid waste infrastructure and disrupt road 
and rail waste transport. Coastal ﬂooding and erosion due to sea level rise threaten low-lying coastal waste facilities.
Housing and Climate Change
Flooding increases mold associated with asthma and allergies. Increased average temperatures and extreme 
weather events may drive rodents closer to people, increasing risk of rodent-borne pathogens.22  
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
137
137
Hazardous Waste and Climate Change
• 
Extreme precipitation, storms, and ﬂooding increase the risk of hazardous waste leakages from storage 
sites and associated exposure to hazardous materials.23   
 
Flooding after Hurricane Harvey caused spills at one of Houston’s dirtiest Superfund toxic waste 
sites, a former petroleum industry waste processing plant.24  
• 
Extreme storms and ﬂooding may cause the emergency shutdown of reﬁneries and chemical 
manufacturing facilities, often associated with ﬂaring and toxic emissions.25  
 
During Hurricane Harvey, ExxonMobil reported damages to two of its reﬁneries, causing the 
release of hazardous materials.26 
• 
Wildﬁres can result in release of toxics when materials are burned, resulting in soil and water 
contamination.
Air Quality and Climate Change 
See Section 4.4—Air Quality
Many regions in the U.S. have a serious problem with particulate matter and ozone pollution; climate change 
makes it more difﬁcult to attain clean air standards.27,28     
• 
Higher temperatures increase ozone and stagnation events create the worst ozone episodes.29 
• 
Greater frequency and intensity of wildﬁres increases exposure to smoke laden with ﬁne particulate 
matter (PM2.5). Wildﬁre smoke spreads over long distances and is associated with increased risks for 
respiratory and cardiovascular disease.30  
• 
Drought is increasing in frequency and severity and causes higher dust levels, causing respiratory 
irritation and exposure to dust-borne fungal spores.
What Local Health Departments Can Do 
Across Programs
Assessment and Surveillance
Surveillance is critical for the identiﬁcation and control of climate-sensitive environmental health outcomes. 
Even states and jurisdiction with sophisticated vector-borne and infectious disease surveillance systems need to 
consider enhancement to ensure adequacy in the era of climate change. 
• 
Monitoring for vectors must be adapted as vector habitats and distribution of tick, mosquito and rodent 
species shift in seasonality, geographic range, and concentration due to climate change.
 
Work with Communicable Disease programs and Vector Control agencies to assess whether 
enhanced surveillance is required.
 
Train PEH staff to identify and report sources of standing water that breeds mosquitos. 
138
138
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Intersectoral Collaboration
PEH often review new development permitting and associated Environmental Impact Reports (EIR). Providing a 
health lens in land use, transportation, and housing planning and in climate action planning brings signiﬁcant 
community health beneﬁts. Reach out to enhance PEH collaboration with city and county planning, public works, 
Regional Water Boards, Vector Control Agencies, and Air Districts.
Regulatory Activities
The role of PEH agencies in permitting and inspecting facilities provides a prime opportunity to integrate climate 
and health education and surveillance across facilities and with diverse populations.
Preparing for Extreme Weather Events and Population Displacement
Strategies to ensure PEH health and safety during climate-related disasters include:
• 
Work with your Public Health Emergency Preparedness program to ensure that plans are in place to 
minimize impacts on food, water, and waste systems during a climate-related disaster.
• 
Develop communication channels and materials to ensure the public is informed about how to protect 
people from illness during climate-related extreme weather events. Make sure all materials are available 
in languages used in the community.
Community Engagement and Education
Work with community partners to develop plans for disseminating information about PEH risks and responses 
that use communication channels and language that will reach all community members.
Coordinate with “community science” programs to provide opportunities for residents to monitor climate-related 
risks and impacts using new, accessible and portable monitoring technologies. Examples of projects include: 
• 
NASA Harmful Algal Bloom tracking program31  
• 
Texas A&M Chagas disease monitoring32 
• 
Unmask My City air monitoring project and campaign33   
Look for opportunities to integrate mentions of climate change in materials and media messages for the public 
whenever relevant, to increase public awareness that climate change is a health issue. Opportunities include 
public health alerts, health advisory announcements, and educational materials and campaigns related to public 
environmental health. 
Make information accessible to all 
• 
Provide information in all languages relevant in your community. 
• 
Make the information culturally appropriate. 
• 
Use multiple formats (print, radio, television, social media) and outlets (community events and meetings, 
worship services, and other venues). 
• 
Use low-literacy formats. 
• 
Address the needs of those with communication impairments.
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
139
139
Food Safety
See Sections 4.8—Food Security and 5.3—Agriculture
Assessment and Surveillance
Increase the frequency of retail food inspections, 
incorporating education about temperature and food 
safety. 
Conduct active surveillance of food-borne illnesses. See 
for example the CDC FoodNet program.34  
Intersectoral Collaboration
Collaborate with local agencies to support sustainable, 
local food systems.
• 
Increase permitting of urban farms and community gardens.
• 
Support zoning changes that facilitate urban farms, community gardens, and mobile vending of fruits  
and vegetables.
• 
Engage with local educational agencies, hospitals, universities, and large food facilities to increase local 
food procurement programs to support sustainable local food systems. 
• 
Collaborate with local agricultural organizations and extension programs to educate growers and 
agricultural operations about agriculture-climate change-health connections. 
• 
Advocate for subsidies for fruits and vegetable farming.
• 
Collaborate broadly to reduce food waste and improve safe surplus food donation.
 
Train all Environmental Health Specialists on climate change, food waste, and safe food recovery 
and food insecurity. Adapt and disseminate the Safe Surplus Food Donation Best Management 
Practices and Toolkit.35,36   
• 
Encourage local electeds to set food waste and recovery goals. 
Regulatory Activities
Increase frequency of retail food inspections and provide materials about liability protections and beneﬁts of 
diverting surplus wholesome food from the waste stream to local nonproﬁt hunger relief agencies.
Update temporary food facility permitting to include a requirement for arrangements with a nonproﬁt hunger 
relief agency to recover surplus edible food following events.
Preparing for Extreme Weather Events and Population Displacement
Establish protocols for minimizing risks associated with disruptions in food cold chains due to extreme events, 
power outages, or transportation problems.
Plan for disruptions in food supply chains.  
An urban farm in Chicago
Linda from Chicago, USA - New crops, CC BY 2.0
140
140
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Community Engagement and Education 
Support community-based organizations that are working to build healthy and sustainable local food systems.
• 
See for examples: Models and Best Practices-Urban Agriculture37   
Collaborate to inform residents about the climate-food-health connection.
• 
Ask businesses and community organizations to share and display educational materials about food 
safety and food waste, such as USDA’s Be Food Safe Campaign, information on food safety following a 
power outage, or resources from the Save the Food Campaign.38,39    
• 
Encourage programs such as Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children 
(WIC) and Nutrition Education and Obesity Prevention (NEOP) programs to integrate education about 
date labels and food waste into materials and education. 
Look for opportunities to integrate mentions of climate change in materials and media messages for the public 
whenever relevant, to increase public awareness that climate change is a health issue. Opportunities include public 
health alerts, health advisory announcements, and educational materials and campaigns related to food safety. 
LHD Spotlight: 
Partnerships to Reduce Food Waste
In  2016 the California Conference of Directors of Environmental Health, the Public Health 
Institute, and local PEH programs developed a Climate Resilience, Equity, and Food Waste 
Reduction training curriculum for Environmental Health Specialists (EHS). The curriculum covered 
the nexus of climate change, food systems and food waste, food insecurity and health equity, 
and the role of EHS in educating the public and ultimately reducing GHGE associated with food 
and organic waste breaking down in the landﬁll. The collaborative team also developed these 
documents: Safe Surplus Food Donation Best Management Practices: Guidance for Environmental 
Health Departments and Safe Surplus Food Donation Toolkit: Guidance for Food Facilities. 
• 
Over 850 EHS were trained across 52 of the 62 state jurisdictions in 30 trainings.
• 
Many departments adopted the recommended best management programs outlined in the 
training sessions, including;
 
Appointing a Safe Surplus Food Donation liaison in Food Program to answer questions 
and provide guidance regarding surplus food donation
 
Posting informational materials on PEH website.
Collaborating with local CBO and other agencies to establish a food recovery workgroup.
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
141
141
Vector Control
See Section 6.2—Infectious Disease
Assessment and Surveillance
Change the frequency or location of monitoring and surveillance programs to detect changes in the geographic 
range or incidence of vectors and vector-borne diseases.40 
• 
Plan enhanced surveillance during droughts and after ﬂooding and storm surge events.
• 
Target communities at risk due to housing conditions, lack of access to water, or other infrastructure 
considerations.
Share disease and vector surveillance data with other LHDs to detect patterns larger than a single jurisdiction.
Develop early warning systems to alert residents of forecast increases in tick or mosquito activity.
Combine data of environmental change, social and demographic determinants, and health system capacity to 
create a predictive model for disease outbreaks for early warning systems.41 
Intersectoral Collaboration
Collaborate with preparedness, communicable disease, and vector control to ensure plans to adequately monitor 
for the introduction and spread of mosquito species new to your jurisdiction (e.g. Aedes Aegypti). 
• 
Prepare an outreach plan for implementation at the ﬁrst detection of invasive Aedes mosquitoes.  
Ask animal control agencies to report unusual disease patterns or increased incidence of wildlife/human contact. 
Work with housing, zoning, building, and public works agencies to reduce vector-borne disease risk:
• 
Require screens on windows throughout mosquito season to prevent transmission (including for renters).
• 
Require businesses that sell tires and other mosquito breeding receptacles keep them inside or covered 
(e.g. with awning).
• 
Increase code enforcement to reduce vector habitat on abandoned or blighted properties.
Work with Communicable Disease and vector control to prepare a plan for suspected and conﬁrmed cases of 
Dengue, Chikungunya, or Zika infection, including:
• 
rapid notiﬁcation to the local vector control agency.42  
• 
case follow-up and management protocols.
• 
protocols and responsibilities for sharing information about human cases of Dengue, Chikungunya,  
and Zika.
Regulatory Activities
Develop protocols to inspect for and address vector breeding habitat during routine inspections. 
• 
Ensure proper installation of screening on rainwater harvest/catchment systems.
142
142
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Preparing for Extreme Weather Events and Population Displacement
Establish (and exercise) plans to respond to detection of invasive mosquito species and/or cases of mosquito-
related illness such as Dengue or Zika, e.g. house-to-house education, inspection for standing water. 
Community Engagement and Education 
Engage residents in identifying and mapping vacant and abandoned buildings to target inspections and improve 
code enforcement to remediate vector habitat. 
• 
The Detroit Blight Removal Task Force partnered with several community-based organizations to 
collaborate with city residents to use a mobile application, “Blexting,” to survey and map all of the 
abandoned and blighted properties across the city. Community scientists took photos of the properties 
and answered a series of standardized questions about each property.43  
Partner with parks and vector control agencies and community-based organizations in community science 
projects that enhance tick and mosquito surveillance.
• 
The San Mateo County Mosquito and Vector Control District and county Parks department conducts 
events that engage community residents in tick collection and mosquito surveillance. During one event, 
community scientists were provided basic training for tick collection and tick bite prevention, and then 
participated in tick collection along 12 miles of trails in the area.44   
Increase public outreach based on changing vector patterns, including education during on-site inspection of 
housing and other facilities.
Look for opportunities to integrate mentions of climate change in materials and media messages for the public 
whenever relevant, to increase public awareness that climate change is a health issue. Opportunities include 
public health alerts, health advisory announcements, and educational materials and campaigns related to vector 
control. For example:
Mosquitos
Original: Reduce the number of mosquitoes inside your home by patching, repairing or 
replacing screens with holes or screens that don’t ﬁt tightly to the door or window frame. 
If your outside doors are ever propped open, make sure there is a screen door and that it 
remains closed.45  
Modiﬁed: Reduce the number of mosquitoes inside your home by patching, repairing or 
replacing screens with holes or screens that don’t ﬁt tightly to the door or window frame. 
Climate change is altering mosquito habitat ranges and breeding patterns, which may 
bring them closer to your home…
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
143
143
Water Access and Quality
Assessment and Surveillance
Ensure monitoring of water temperature and prompt 
cessation of seafood and shellﬁsh harvesting when 
temperatures are high, to prevent Vibrio-related 
illness.46  
Establish protocols for increased monitoring of water 
quality after ﬂooding and during prolonged drought 
conditions.
Increase frequency of monitoring for harmful algal 
blooms/toxins with warmer temperatures in beach 
waters and recreational water bodies. 
Assess water security (e.g. likelihood of drought, 
projected impact on drinking water, water for 
agriculture/livestock, inventory of wells); map 
populations vulnerable to water insecurity.
Intersectoral Collaboration
Coordinate with planning, housing, building and public works agencies to increase use of permeable pavements 
and safe rainwater harvesting systems,
Collaborate with regional water agencies to plan for alternative water sources for drinking and hygiene following 
ﬂooding and drought.
Collaborate with water districts and water utilities to increase public support and plan for “indirect potable reuse” 
projects that replenish groundwater with recycled wastewater.
• 
Orange County, CA expects to process and pump 130 million gallons of wastewater into groundwater 
basins per day. Orange County Water District has projected that the wastewater treatment project will 
eventually supply water to 2.4 million people, meeting approximately 40% of the county’s water needs.47 
 
 
Work with parks and public works agencies to implement strategies (e.g. planting trees, permeable surfaces) to 
reduce water temperature and standing water in public areas.
Coordinate with parks and water agencies to inform the public and policy makers on climate change and water 
quality issues.
Regulatory Activities
Increase permitting of water conservation methods such as rainwater harvesting/catchment systems, on-site grey 
water reuse. 
During routine inspections of pools and spas educate owners about the risk of mosquito breeding in poorly 
maintained swimming pools, spas, or backyard ponds.
Algal Bloom Warning, Marion Lake, KS, US
Dr. Jennifer L. Graham, U.S. Geological Survey
144
144
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Preparing for Extreme Weather Events and Population Displacement 
Prepare and translate materials in advance to inform the public about how to protect from contaminated water or 
obtain adequate water supplies, including Boil Water and Do Not Drink orders.
During ﬂooding events or prolonged drought encourage well users to use alternative drinking water (i.e. bottled 
water) while testing the water for bacteria, nitrates, arsenic, and other contaminants and treating as needed. 
• 
Following the wildﬁres in Sonoma County in 2017, a Do Not Boil, Do Not Drink order was issued due to 
benzene contamination in the water.48   
Develop strategies to provide emergency or supplemental water sources (e.g. agreements for purchase/provision 
of bottled water, locations to store and distribute it, agreements with water suppliers and haulers). 
Identify, support, and implement long-term water conservation strategies, in partnership with regional water 
districts and community partners.
Community Engagement and Education 
Engage community residents in community science projects. 
• 
Support projects to monitor water bodies for harmful algal blooms. See CyanoTracker for an example of 
HAB monitoring.49  
• 
Partner with CBOs to conduct community-based projects to revitalize streams and waterways.
 
The Morrison Creek Revitalization Project in South Sacramento, CA is a “collaborative 
community-based urban stream revitalization project,” which aims to transform a stretch of 
local creek into a naturalized and attractive waterway, improving active transportation and 
neighborhood connectivity.50  
Support community based organizations that are educating about and advocating for clean water. See, for 
example, the network of Waterkeepers.51  
• 
The Environmental Justice Coalition of Water worked to secure passage of California AB 685 - Human 
Right to Water.52   
• 
Black Mesa Water Coalition works to stop overuse of and prevent coal contamination of the  
Navajo Aquifer.53  
Look for opportunities to integrate mentions of climate change in materials and media messages for the public 
whenever relevant, to increase public awareness that climate change is a health issue. Opportunities include 
public health alerts, health advisory announcements, and educational materials and campaigns related to water 
safety. For example:
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
145
145
Harmful Algal Blooms
Original: Public advised to avoid water contact: High levels of toxic algae have been found 
in X water body. A harmful algal bloom of Microcystis aeruginosa is occurring in the water 
body. This type of blue-green algae produces a toxin that can cause rashes and other illness. 
The Virginia Department of Health is warning citizens to stay out of the water and to keep 
their pets and children out as well. Due to low body weight, children and pets are at greater 
risk of severe illness if the water is ingested. Harmful algal blooms occur when warm water 
and nutrients combine to make conditions favorable for blue-green algae growth.54
Modiﬁed: Harmful algal blooms occur when warm water and nutrients combine to make 
conditions favorable for blue-green algae growth. These conditions are occurring more 
frequently because climate change is causing warmer water temperatures.”
Solid Waste
Assessment and Surveillance
Assess local landﬁll and waste management sites’ vulnerability to projected climate impacts (ﬂooding, sea 
level rise). 
Assess potential public health risks associated with compromised solid waste management facilities, including 
water and refuse management in the case of extreme weather events.
Conduct health impact assessments (HIA) - in collaboration with community stakeholders - to assess the 
potential health beneﬁts and adverse impacts of proposed biogas, anaerobic digesters, and other waste-to-energy 
(WTE) projects.
• 
Portland Metro conducted a rapid HIA on a proposed waste–to-energy project that would divert waste 
from the local landﬁll to an alternate facility. The rapid HIA illustrated that while there were negligible 
differences in the potential health impacts of either type of facility, the WTE project would generate 10 
times the energy than the methane-to-energy production from the landﬁll. It was recommended that more 
in-depth research be conducted to assess the longer-term environmental and equity impacts of WTE.55   
Intersectoral Collaboration
Collaborate with local waste and recycling agencies, public works, waste haulers and community organizations 
to support and facilitate organic waste diversion efforts, for example through community composting workshops.
• 
In partnership with Denver Recycles, Denver Urban Gardens hosts free public composting workshops 
regularly throughout the spring and summer.56  
Regulatory Activities
In alignment with state organic waste diversion mandates, support diversion of organic waste and food waste to 
other recycling facilities, such as composting facilities or anaerobic digesters.
• 
In California in 2014, Governor Brown signed AB 1826, which aims to reduce the amount of organic 
waste being sent to the landﬁll. The mandate outlines that business or multi-family dwellings that 
generate a certain amount of waste must recycle organic waste.57  
146
146
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
• 
In the City of Seattle in 2014, the city passed a council bill that all commercial establishments must divert 
food and paper waste to organics recycling facilities.58 
Work with water, planning, and building agencies to explore expanded permitting of “eco-toilets”—composting 
and urine-diverting toilets. Massachusetts’s law, for example, explicitly allows the use of composting toilets.59  
Decrease barriers associated with organic waste diversion. 
• 
Promote siting of community gardens, community composting operations, and large-scale composting 
facilities and anaerobic digesters.
Educate and collaborate with other agencies and sectors to increase safe and appropriate distribution of biosolids 
on open land, including consideration of odors and proximity to homes and communities. 
Preparing for Extreme Weather Events and Population Displacement
Establish solid waste disposal and management protocols for extreme weather events, for example in evacuation 
sites or in the event of compromise of solid waste disposal sites and transport 
Integrate projected climate impacts and climate preparedness into: 
• 
current solid waste management protocols (e.g. assess risks of combined sewer overﬂow)
• 
siting and approval of solid waste facilities
Community Engagement and Education 
Increase public education regarding the beneﬁts of organic waste diversion.
Look for opportunities to integrate mentions of climate change in materials and media messages for the public 
whenever relevant, to increase public awareness that climate change is a health issue. Opportunities include public 
health alerts, health advisory announcements, and educational materials and campaigns related to solid waste.
Housing
Intersectoral Collaboration
Coordinate with public health nursing, maternal and child health, communicable disease to  integrate 
assessments and referrals to address mosquito protection (e.g. screening, standing water) and rodent control. 
Regulatory Activities
Integrate inspection for window screening and vector habitat into routine multi-unit housing inspections.
During inspections of farmworker housing, assess ventilation, air conditioning, screening, and access to safe 
drinking water.
During inspections of organized homeless encampments assess sanitation, and potential risks associated with 
climate-related events (e.g. extreme heat, ﬂooding, storms).
Preparing for Extreme Weather Events and Population Displacement 
Work with PHEP and emergency management agencies to ensure adequate sanitation, drinking water, and vector 
and rodent control in evacuation shelters. 
Connect with community-based organizations and social service agencies to ensure inhabitants of organized 
homeless encampments are aware of resources in the event of a climate-related emergency. 
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
147
147
Community Engagement and Education 
Support community organizations that are endeavoring to improve housing conditions that will increase 
resilience to climate change impacts and improve health and social cohesion.
• 
Learn more about Community-Based Housing Strategies.60  
Look for opportunities to integrate mentions of climate change in materials and media messages for the public 
whenever relevant, to increase public awareness that climate change is a health issue. Opportunities include 
public health alerts, health advisory announcements, and educational materials and campaigns related to 
housing. For example:
Flooding and Mold
Original: Mold can create serious health problems for residents recovering from the severe 
storms and ﬂooding…61
Modiﬁed: Climate change is increasing the frequency of severe storms and ﬂooding. Mold 
can create serious health problems for residents recovering from the severe storms and 
ﬂooding…
Hazardous Waste
Assessment and Surveillance
Map hazardous waste sites and establish protocols for monitoring for release of toxics following extreme weather 
events, ﬂoods, and wildﬁres. 
Intersectoral Collaboration
Collaborate with environmental protection agencies and facility operators to assure that climate projections and 
related risks are being assessed and planned for.
Regulatory Activities
Consider projected climate impacts when reviewing permitting applications for hazardous waste sites and 
facilities that store hazardous materials.
Preparing for Extreme Weather Events and Population Displacement 
Work with PHEP and emergency management agencies to include considerations for exposure to hazardous 
materials in emergency response and recovery plans.
Community Engagement and Education 
Draft emergency notices (including in multiple language) about toxics contamination in advance of an emergency.
Collaborate with community-based organizations to inform residents near facilities that store hazardous materials 
or waste about potential risks of contamination following an extreme weather event and appropriate protective 
measures.
148
148
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Look for opportunities to integrate mentions of climate change in materials and media messages for the public 
whenever relevant, to increase public awareness that climate change is a health issue. Opportunities include 
public health alerts, health advisory announcements, and educational materials and campaigns related to 
hazardous materials and waste.
Air Quality 
See Section 4.4—Air Quality 
Assessment and Surveillance
Work with local air quality management agencies to increase monitoring of air quality with rising temperatures 
and during wildﬁres, and encourage use of community science to enhance air quality monitoring. 
Intersectoral Collaboration
Collaborate with housing, maternal and child health, public health nursing, and ﬁre agencies to integrate climate-
related indoor air quality concerns such as mold into home visits and inspections.
Preparing for Extreme Weather Events and Population Displacement
Collaborate with Public Health Emergency Preparedness to establish a plan for “cleaner air” shelters in case of 
wildﬁres and smoke. Include:
• 
Identiﬁcation of facilities with tight-sealing windows and doors, and public access (newer public 
schools, ﬁre stations), with a ventilation system that can signiﬁcantly reduce intake of outdoor air; newer 
buildings tend to be more desirable.
• 
Ensure ﬁlters are upgraded prior to ﬁre season.
• 
See the sample cleaner air shelter checklist from Oregon Health Authority.62  
Community Engagement and Education 
Work with the local air quality management district or air quality control agencies to raise awareness about the 
connections between climate change, air quality, and health. 
Look for opportunities to integrate mentions of climate change in materials and media messages for the public 
whenever relevant, to increase public awareness that climate change is a health issue. Opportunities include public 
health alerts, health advisory announcements, and educational materials and campaigns related to air quality.
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
149
149
6.4 Chronic Disease and Injury Prevention and Control 
Chronic disease and injury prevention and control programs (CDIP) address a diverse array of health outcomes, 
behavioral risk factors, and social and environmental determinants of health, all of which are connected to 
climate change. 
Key Messages 
Why Chronic Disease and Injury Prevention Programs Should Care
• 
Climate change and chronic disease have shared systemic causes and shared solutions. Our 
transportation and land use, energy, food and agriculture, building and housing, and economic 
systems are major contributors to climate change and to the living conditions that drive chronic 
disease, injuries, and health inequities. Many upstream interventions to reduce chronic disease and 
injuries are the same as those required to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. See below and Section 
5—Health Beneﬁts. 
• 
Climate change impacts temperature, air quality, food production, pollen production, and water 
access, which in turn makes it harder to prevent and control chronic illness. Rising temperatures 
increase the formation of ozone, making it more difﬁcult to meet air quality standards that 
protect against cardiovascular and respiratory disease. Rising temperatures make outdoor 
exercise and active transportation more difﬁcult, leading to lower levels of physical activity and 
greater dependence on GHGE emitting-vehicles. Climate impacts—such as drought and extreme 
storms—increase crop loss and drive up food prices that spur increased consumption of cheaper, 
energy intensive meat and processed food. Extreme weather events cause injuries and fatalities, 
and warming temperatures are associated with increased violence.
• 
Climate change exacerbates existing inequities in populations living with chronic illness. Low 
income communities and communities of color have a higher prevalence of chronic illness and 
disabilities because of the cumulative burden of toxics and air pollution exposure and lesser 
access to affordable healthy foods and physical activity opportunities. People with pre-existing 
chronic illness and disabilities are more susceptible to the health impacts of climate change.
What Chronic Disease and Injury Prevention Programs Can Do
• 
Enhance surveillance and mapping of demographic changes, chronic disease prevalence, and 
built environment to address changes in chronic diseases and injury risks and burdens associated 
with climate change. 
• 
Collaborate with agencies in other sectors to promote GHGE reduction strategies with health 
beneﬁts and to reduce risk of adverse health outcomes associated with climate change impacts 
for those with pre-existing chronic diseases.
• 
Work with Emergency Preparedness to include considerations for those with chronic illness and 
disabilities in emergency response and recovery plans for climate-related emergencies.
• 
Support community engagement and inform the public and policy makers about the connections 
between chronic disease and injury, climate change, and the beneﬁts of climate action.
• 
Inform health care providers and patients about climate change impacts on chronic disease, how 
to protect against them, and the climate beneﬁts of healthy eating and active transportation.
150
150
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Shared Causes and Solutions: Climate Change and Chronic Disease 
Transportation and Chronic Disease 
See Section 5.1—Transportation
Transportation impacts on climate change, chronic disease and injury
• The transportation sector accounts for almost 30% of the U.S. GHGE.1  
• Climate-related extreme weather events disrupt transportation systems.
• Transportation allows access to jobs, education, and essential services.
• Our current transportation system fosters physical inactivity associated with obesity, diabetes, heart disease, 
stroke, osteoporosis, depression, and some cancers.
• Motor vehicle crashes are the leading cause of injury, disability, and death in the U.S. for 5–24-year-olds.2,3    
• Motor vehicles emit air pollutants that increase risk for heart disease, asthma and other respiratory disease, 
cancer, premature death, and affect lung and brain development of children.4  
• Road infrastructure contributes to loss of farmland, diminishing the ease of creating local/regional sustainable 
food systems that enhance healthy eating.5 
Transportation and health equity 
• Low-income individuals and people of color are more likely to live near busy roadways and face 
disproportionate impact by pollutants from motor vehicles.6,7    
• Low-income people, people of color and children face greater risk of death and injury due to motor vehicle 
crashes. Pedestrians are killed at higher rates in poorer neighborhoods.8,9   
• Transportation is the second largest expense for American households, costing more than food, clothing, and 
health care.10
• Low-income families often have few low-cost transportation options, with the result that almost 30% of their 
income goes to transportation alone.11  
What can CDIP do?
Support transportation policies and programs with health and climate beneﬁts.  
• Active transportation increases physical activity. Modest shifts in travel mode from car to biking, walking, and 
public transit yield big reductions in chronic disease, cut GHGE, and improve health equity.
 Implement Safe Routes to School, Complete Streets, and complete neighborhoods 
 Increase funding for transit and bicycle/pedestrian infrastructure
• Zero emission vehicles and hybrid low carbon vehicles reduce air pollution and climate pollution; ZEV 
policies need to include equitable access to ZEV for low-income communities, such as: 
 ZEV ﬁnancial incentive programs for consumers
 Increased infrastructure (e.g. charging stations)
• Low carbon fuel standards and fuel efﬁciency standards reduce air pollution and climate pollution.
Assess the health beneﬁts of strategies to reduce transportation GHGE and inform the public and policy 
makers of those beneﬁts. 
• The Integrated Transport and Health Impacts Model (ITHIM) quantiﬁes the health beneﬁts and harms of 
regional transportation plans12 (See Section 7.1—Surveillance). 
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
151
151
Energy and Chronic Disease 
See Section 5.2—Energy
Energy impacts on climate change, chronic disease and injury 
• In 2016, electricity production contributed 28% of U.S. CO2 emissions.13 
• Energy systems provide for heating, lighting, and cooking.
• Natural gas extraction, storage, and transport are associated with methane emissions.
• Burning fossil fuels—especially coal—produces signiﬁcant air pollution associated with heart disease, asthma, 
and chronic lung disease.
• Fossil fuel extraction, transportation, processing and storage are associated with signiﬁcant health impacts.
Energy and health equity
• Coal power plants are disproportionately located in low-income and communities of color.14 
• The greatest impacts of coal air pollution affect children, the elderly, low- income communities, people of 
color and communities downwind of power plants.
• For many low-income families, “fuel poverty” due to high energy costs means choosing between paying for 
energy to cook, heat, or cool homes, and buying food or medicine.15  
• High energy costs may impede use of air conditioning during heat waves, increasing the risk of heat illness 
and deaths.16 
What can CDIP do?
Support energy policies and programs with health and climate beneﬁts. 
• Energy efﬁciency reduces the need for energy production, decreases indoor air pollution, and reduces  
energy costs.17,18    
 Strengthen building and appliance standards for energy efﬁciency.
 Expand low-income energy retroﬁtting and weatherization programs.
• Renewable energy (from sun, wind, geothermal) generation releases about 1/20th the GHGE of coal over the 
full life-cycle.19
 Strengthen targets and provide incentives for renewable energy use.
 Establish goals to phase out new fossil fuel extraction and infrastructure and shift investments from 
fossil fuels to clean energy. 
 Regulate methane leakage from natural gas extraction, production, and distribution.
 Provide for access to solar energy for low-income households and multi-unit housing.
152
152
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Food and Agriculture and Chronic Disease 
See Section 5.3—Agriculture
Food and Agriculture systems impacts on climate change, chronic disease and injury 
• In 2016, agriculture was responsible for 8.6% of total U.S. GHGE.20 When fertilizer use, refrigeration, 
transportation, and land use changes, such as deforestation and soil depletion, are taken into account, food 
and agriculture systems account for about a third of all U.S. GHGE.21
o Agriculture—primarily livestock production—accounts for 52% and 84% of U.S. methane and 
nitrous oxide emissions respectively.22
• Agriculture and food systems impact the cost and availability of nutritious and unhealthy foods, and 
contribute to antibiotic resistance, water contamination, and pesticide illness. 
• Poor nutrition contributes to diabetes, cardiovascular disease, obesity, and cancer.23 
• Americans eat far more meat than is recommended, contributing to cardiovascular disease and cancer.24 
Food and Agriculture systems and health equity
• Climate impacts will further decrease the access and affordability of safe water and fresh produce for low-
income families.25
• Indigenous communities practice traditional hunting, subsistence farming and ﬁshing, and are thus vulnerable 
to climate change impacts on local game, farming and aquatic habitats. Rising sea levels threaten ﬁshing 
habitats for many indigenous coastal communities.26
• Food insecurity is more common in people of color and those living in poverty. According to the USDA, 12.3% 
of U.S. households were food insecure in 2016: 22.5% of Black households, 18.5% of Hispanic households, 
10.7% of other, non-Hispanic households, only 9.3% of White households.27
• According to 2000 data, 13.5 million people in the U.S. have low access to a supermarket, 82% of whom live 
in urban areas.28 In these areas, the impacts of climate change on food security and health are exacerbated by 
lack of access to healthy foods.  
What can CDIP do?
Support food and agriculture policies and programs with climate and health beneﬁts: 
• Localized, sustainable and resilient food systems reduce the use of fossil fuels in food transport, processing, 
packaging, and storage, increase access to healthy foods, build social capital, neighborhood support systems, 
and improve mental health.29 
o Support urban and peri-urban agriculture, school and community gardens, farmer’s markets, mobile 
produce vendors, and food hubs.30 
• Sustainable and agroecological agricultural practices conserve soil and water, sequester carbon, and reduce 
use of toxic chemicals.31,32,33,34,35,36       
• Strategies such as SNAP EBT at farmer’s markets and zoning to allow mobile produce vendors make local, 
healthy food more available and affordable.37,38   
• Collaborate with Environmental Health, hospitals and food businesses to minimize food waste and increase 
surplus food donation to reduce methane emissions from landﬁlls, conserve resources, and reduce food 
insecurity.39 
• Campaigns to reduce meat consumption support heart health, and reduce methane emissions and pollution 
from commercial animal feeding operations.40
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
153
153
How Climate Change Impacts Chronic 
Disease and Injury 
Climate Change Impacts on Asthma and 
Respiratory Disease
Worsening air quality exacerbates asthma, allergies, 
and other respiratory illnesses.
• 
Ozone: Ground level ozone formation 
increases with rising temperatures, leading 
to thousands of excess illnesses and deaths 
per year in coming decades, due to asthma 
exacerbation and greater sensitivity to 
allergens.41,42,43
• 
Particulate matter (PM) and wildﬁre smoke: 
Climate change increases the frequency 
and intensity of wildﬁres. Wildﬁre smoke 
is laden with ﬁne particulate matter 
(PM2.5), spreads over long distances, and 
increases risk of premature deaths, ED 
visits, and hospitalizations, especially for 
cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, 
including asthma and bronchitis.44,45   
• 
Drought, increasing in frequency and 
severity due to climate change—dries out 
the soil and increases dust levels, causing 
respiratory irritation.
• 
Indoor mold growth after extreme 
precipitation and ﬂood events may trigger 
asthma and infectious diseases such as 
Legionnaire’s disease.46 
Allergies are intensiﬁed as: 
• 
Increasing temperatures and precipitation changes lead to earlier and longer pollen and allergy seasons. 
• 
Ozone sensitizes the respiratory tract to allergens.47 
• 
Higher carbon dioxide levels increase pollen production and potency.48 
Thunderstorms are occurring more often during high pollen season, causing severe asthma epidemics.49  
Extreme heat increases death rates and acute morbidity in people with pre-existing respiratory disease.50  
Displacement and disruption in health care services due to climate-related disasters impedes asthma and COPD 
management.51  
Population Spotlight: 
People with disabilities are 
at increased risk123 
People with disabilities have high rates of 
illness, injuries, or death during extreme 
weather and heat events. Cognitive, hearing, 
physical, and mobility impairments may 
impede safe evacuation during extreme storms, 
ﬂooding and heat waves. 
• 
14% of the people who remained in New 
Orleans during Hurricane Katrina had a 
physical disability.124 
• 
Emergency information and instructions are 
not always made accessible for those with 
disabilities that affect communication.125 
• 
Limited mobility can increase the risk of 
isolation, a risk factor for heat illness,13 
•
Cognitive impairment may limit the ability 
to recognize risk or seek assistance during 
an extreme heat event.
• 
Power outages can impair electrically 
powered medical equipment and elevators, 
preventing some people with disabilities 
from evacuating or leaving them stranded 
without necessary treatments.126 
154
154
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Climate Change, Asthma, and Equity
Due to the intersection of race, poverty and preexisting chronic illness, low-income individuals and people of 
color are disproportionately affected by health impacts of climate change.52  
• 
U.S. cities with the worst air quality have high densities of low-income communities and communities of 
color and are projected to have the greatest climate change-related ozone increases.53,54     
• 
People living in very low income neighborhoods are four times more likely to visit the emergency room 
or be hospitalized for asthma, relative to higher income areas.55 
• 
Asthma prevalence in African-Americans is 11.2% compared to 7.7% for Whites and African-Americans 
are three times more likely to visit the emergency room for asthma.56  
Climate Change Impacts on Diabetes
People with diabetes are at increased risk of heat illness.57,58   
• 
Diabetes complications such as damage 
to blood vessels and nerves can affect the 
ability of sweat glands to cool the body 
effectively. 
• 
People with diabetes are more susceptible to 
dehydration; commonly used medications 
such as diuretics can also increase 
dehydration risks, which are exacerbated by 
heat exposure.
• 
Exposure to heat reduces the efﬁcacy of 
insulin, and may require adjustments in 
insulin dosing.
Extreme weather events disrupt dietary management 
and access to medications; power outages cause loss 
of refrigeration for insulin. 
Climate Change, Diabetes, and Equity
Due to the intersection of race, poverty and chronic 
illness, people of color and those with lower 
educational attainment are at higher risk of negative 
health impacts of climate change on diabetes.59  
• 
Diabetes prevalence is higher among 
American Indians/Alaska Natives (15.1%), 
non-Hispanic blacks (12.7%), and people of 
Hispanic ethnicity (12.1%) than among non-
Hispanic whites (7.4%) and  
Asians (8.0%).60 
Population Spotlight: 
Homelessness and 
Heat Illness
“… the homeless population in the U.S. 
suffers from disproportionate levels of 
chronic disease, particularly cardiovascular 
disease, respiratory conditions, and mental 
illness, as well as alcohol and drug use that 
can make them even more vulnerable. Many 
also lack access to the facilities that are most 
helpful during heat waves, like water, food, 
shelter, and health care and other social 
services. More homeless people are likely to 
sleep outside when it’s hot out, which can 
leave them more vulnerable to harassment, 
abuse, or theft of their belongings. And while 
the majority of the homeless population is 
under the age of 50, the dangers are even 
greater for elderly homeless individuals, who 
may be less mobile and particularly prone to 
pre-existing conditions.”74  
– Deepa Sivarajan 
Earth Institute- Columbia University
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
155
155
• 
12.6% of adults with less than a high school education had diagnosed diabetes versus 9.5% of those with 
a high school education and 7.2% of those with more than a high school education.61  
Climate Change Impacts on Cardiovascular Disease (CVD)
People with CVD have increased risks associated with climate impacts: 
• 
As core body temperature increases, the cardiovascular system is “over-loaded,” increasing the risk of 
direct heat mortality.62   
• 
Higher ground-level ozone exposures due to heat and particulate matter and dust exposure, from 
wildﬁres and drought increase risk for heart attack and uncontrolled hypertension in people with CVD.63 
• 
Extreme weather events disrupt medication management and health care access, and cause signiﬁcant 
acute stress. 
People with CVD may be less able to regulate core body temperature in response to heat.64   
• 
Diminished heart function and arterial narrowing reduce capacity to increase skin blood ﬂow
• 
Some medications (e.g. beta blockers, diuretics, anti-depressants, antihistamines) interfere with heat 
regulation. See Medication and Heat- Pima County.65,66    
Climate Change, CVD, and Equity
Due to the intersection of race, poverty and chronic 
illness, low-income individuals and people of color 
are at higher risk of negative health impacts of 
climate change on cardiovascular disease.67  
• 
African Americans have a higher prevalence 
of unrecognized CVD risk factors and a 
greater burden of myocardial infarction, 
heart failure, and stroke.68  
Climate Impacts on Mental Illness
Extreme weather events such as wildﬁres, drought, 
and ﬂoods disrupt medication management and 
increase the risk of post-traumatic stress disorder, 
depression, suicide, anxiety, substance abuse, and 
interpersonal violence.69 
Drought and extreme weather events not only 
impose physical damage but also damage the social 
fabric of communities. Even people who are not 
directly impacted may experience stress, anxiety, 
and fear about climate change and its impacts, 
based on news reports and through the experiences 
of family and friends.
Impact Spotlight: 
Climate Change and 
Violence
Psychological studies have shown that 
exposing individuals to high, uncomfortable 
temperatures increases aggressive thinking, 
perceived aggression in others, hostile 
feelings, and violent behavior.81 Violence 
can often be triggered or exacerbated by 
underlying poverty and resource shortages, 
making certain communities more vulnerable 
than others. In the U.S., studies have shown 
association between periods of extreme heat 
and increased rates of violent crimes.82 With 
rising temperatures due to climate change, 
there is an increased risk of extreme heat days 
and periods in many regions, increasing the 
likelihood of interpersonal violence.83 One 
analysis found that a single standard-deviation 
increase in temperature elevates the risk of 
person-to-person violence by 2.4% and the risk 
of group-to-group violence by about 11%.84 
156
156
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Economic burden associated with climate related 
disasters may increase the likelihood of stress-
related mental health problems. 
Heat is associated with an increased incidence of 
violence, aggression, suicide and higher rates of 
admission for those with a psychiatric condition.70 
Interactions between some psychotropic 
medications and heat increase the risk of adverse 
medication effects and/or heat illness.71,72    
Persons with mental illness may have triple the  
risk of death during a heat wave and. 
individuals with mental illness admitted to 
emergency departments for heat-related illness 
have a higher risk of death.73 
Climate Impacts on Injuries
Extreme weather events increase the risk of 
injury and death due to trauma or drowning.
• 
During the 2017–2018 Northern and 
Southern California wildﬁres and 
subsequent mudslides, thousands of 
home and businesses were destroyed or 
damaged and 44 people were killed.75,76,77 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
Risks for falls, car crashes, and 
electrocutions are increased during 
recovery and clean up.78   
Extreme heat may decrease mental performance, 
increasing occupational injury risk for 
those working at heights or operating heavy 
machinery.79 
Climate Change, Injuries, and Equity
• 
Utility workers, emergency workers and 
ﬁrst responders, including healthcare 
and public safety workers, are at 
increased risk for injury during and after 
extreme weather. Workers may be out 
during a severe weather event, which 
increases risk for death or injury from lightning strikes, ﬂooding, high winds or other conditions.80 
• 
Individuals with limited mobility and/or social connections are at increased risk of injury, illness and 
death related to extreme weather events. 
MAKIN
Prepare
 
• Prepa
and p
water
prepa
such 
stress
health
your 
 
• Evacu
Evacu
ety sy
the si
health
 
• Check
treme
Seek tre
 
• Ment
but tr
hance
or som
a pers
condi
 
• Be aw
couns
inform
spiritu
 
• Engag
comfo
er-rel
 
• Moni
chang
inabil
when
ing ex
weath
monit
and c
Resourc
 
• To lea
clima
menta
 
• For m
what 
print,
clima
IMMEDIATE IMPACTS
Natural disasters are sudden in their onset and include destructive storms, 
ﬂoods, wildﬁres, and extreme heat.
Natural disasters may cause posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 
anxiety, depression, and stress. Self-harm, including substance abuse and 
suicidal ideation, may also occur.
READINESS: Seek education about what to expect and how to prepare 
for future climate events.
GRADUAL IMPACTS
Slowly progressing, long-term conditions associated with climate change 
include rising temperatures, elevated sea levels, 
 
and changing precipitation patterns.
Chronic stress can result from the gradual impacts 
of climate change. For example infectious 
diseases, chronic diseases (asthma and 
allergies), nutritional deﬁciencies, and 
injuries can contribute to stress.
MONITORING: Know your health, and 
determine whether you are stressed 
(signs include low energy, tension, and 
headaches). Seek treatment and/or 
support if needed.
INDIRECT IMPACTS
Climate change can affect the way 
we think about ourselves, each 
other, and the world.
After a climate event or resulting 
displacement, people may experience 
a diminished sense of self, difﬁculty 
relating to others, diminished social 
interaction, and solastalgia (the loss 
 
of a sense of place, solace, and security 
tied to one’s physical environment). 
Community impacts include domestic abuse, 
child abuse, and violence (e.g., assault and civil 
conﬂict). Economic insecurity and physical 
damage are other potential effects.
COOPERATION: Establish social ties and connections with community 
members. This will help to withstand changes and encourage adaptation. 
 
Climate Change  
Impacts on Mental Health
This document is made possible by memorandum of understanding between the American Public 
Health Association and ecoAmerica.
APHA, Climate for Health, ecoAmerica, American Psychological Association 2017
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
157
157
Climate Change Impacts on Physical Activity and Nutrition
Climate change impacts the opportunity for people and communities to engage in activities and behaviors that 
reduce chronic disease risk. 
Physical Activity: Climate impacts may limit opportunities for safe physical activity. 
• 
Heat: Increasing frequency and severity of extreme heat events may limit outdoor physical activity. Rising 
average temperatures increase harmful algal blooms (HAB) in recreational waters.
• 
Air Quality: In the world’s most polluted cities, people with respiratory and CVD are at higher risk and 
are advised to limit outdoor activity when air pollution levels are high.85  
Climate change threatens to increase food insecurity and access to affordable healthy foods, essential for 
prevention and management of chronic disease86,87 (See Section 4.8—Food Security). 
• 
About 12% of U.S. households (15.6 million) were food insecure in 2016.88  
• 
Extreme heat, drought, and extreme weather events reduce crop yields and production of tree fruit and 
nuts, milk, and eggs; ocean acidiﬁcation and drought exacerbate decline of ﬁsheries.89,90    
What Local Health Departments Can Do 
Across Programs  
Assessment and Surveillance
See Section 7.1—Surveillance
Include chronic disease, physical disability, and mental disability prevalence indicators in Climate, Health, and 
Equity Vulnerability Assessments.
Plan and implement syndromic surveillance to identify respiratory and CVD impacts associated with heat, 
wildﬁres and other extreme events.91,92    
Conduct a Community Assessment for Public Health Emergency Response (CASPER) to assess mental health and 
other impacts of drought and extreme events.93,94    
Use data to support healthy transportation access, active transportation, and outdoor recreation.
• 
Map parks, open space, trails, bike routes, bike paths, and pedestrian routes.
 
OpenDataPhilly provides access to datasets related to active transportation, green space and  
tree canopy.95  
 
Map bicycle and pedestrian crashes to support design change for safe biking and walking. See 
California’s Transportation Injury Mapping System96 and Hawaii State Health Department 
interactive map of bike and pedestrian crashes.97  
 
Houghton, MI: The Western Upper Peninsula Health Department worked with the local Bike Task 
Force to complete the League of American Bicyclists’ Bicycle Friendly Community Survey which 
informs the city’s Complete Streets policy and Bicycle Friendly City resolution.98 
 
Maricopa County, AZ used BioSense to identify nearly 600 cases of heat-related illness in near 
real-time, and plans to use this data to inform interventions for heat-related illness prevention.99  
158
158
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
• 
Analyze health impacts of various transportation planning scenarios using tools such as ITHIM.100  
 
The ITHIM-Sacramento equity analysis tool uses health, injury, and physical activity information 
to evaluate expected health outcomes for subpopulations (by race/ethnicity, income, and county) 
for various scenarios versus the adopted plan.101   
Use data to support policies and zoning laws for healthy food access. 
• 
Map local/regional food systems, assets, and food insecurity
 
Johns Hopkins Center for a Livable Future’s Maryland Food System Map, Feeding America’s Map 
the Meal Gap, Local Food System Asset Mapping, CDC’s Healthier Food Retail: Beginning the 
Assessment Process in Your State or Community.102,103,104,105   
Maryland Food System Map
mdfoodsystemmap.org
Intersectoral Collaboration
Collaborate with other agencies to increase opportunities for physical activity and healthy living.  
• 
Inform agency partners about the magnitude and causes of chronic illness, and the signiﬁcance of the 
health beneﬁts that can be attained through GHGE reduction strategies that promote healthy eating and 
active living.106 
• 
Support funding, policies, and programs to reduce vehicle miles travelled, such as ambitious VMT 
reduction goals and supporting metrics, investments in pedestrian and bicycle infrastructure and transit, 
speed reduction, Safe Routes to School, reduced transit fares for youth, transit-oriented development and 
“Complete Communities” linked with anti-displacement measures107 (See Section 5.1—Transportation).
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
159
159
• 
Support funding, policies and programs for parks, green and open space, urban greening and tree 
canopy, and shading for transit stops, school grounds, and bike/walking paths (See Section 5.4—Urban 
Greening).  
 
The Washington DC Departments of Health and Parks and Recreation “Parks Prescription 
Program” provided local providers with resources for patients about neighborhood parks.108   
• 
Work with camps, schools and childcare centers to establish policies and protocols for safe outdoor 
activity during extreme heat and bad air days (See Section 6.1—Maternal Health).  
• 
Work with indoor, air-conditioned recreational facilities to provide access and reduced fees to low-income 
individuals. 
Collaborate to increase access to healthy and affordable food and reduce meat consumption (See Section 5.3—
Agriculture).
• 
Support localized, sustainable and resilient food systems that reduce the use of fossil fuels in food 
transport, processing, packaging, and storage, increase access to healthy foods, build social capital, 
neighborhood support systems, and improve mental health.109,110     
 
Work with local food policy councils and planning and agricultural agencies and school districts 
to reduce zoning and legal barriers and promote urban and peri-urban agriculture, farm to school, 
school and community gardens, mobile produce vendors, and food hubs.111   
 
Support food procurement policies that preferentially source local and regionally grown foods in 
schools, hospitals, government agencies and businesses.112 
• 
Support sustainable and agroecological agricultural practices that conserve soil and water, sequester 
carbon, and reduce use of toxic chemicals.113  
• 
Support policies that make local, healthy food available to all, such as SNAP EBT at farmers markets, 
nutrition subscription programs, or mobile food vending in residential areas.114,115    
• 
Conduct campaigns in partnership with schools, businesses, agencies and communities to reduce 
consumption of meat (“Meatless Mondays”) and other processed foods.116   
 
Promote clean water access including investments in water stations for schools and communities. 
• 
Work with Environmental Health, local food policy councils, businesses, schools, and hospitals to reduce 
food waste and enhance surplus food donation to nonproﬁt hunger relief organizations.
 
See this guidance on share tables in schools from Washington state.117 
Collaborate with Air Quality Management Districts and Transportation to reduce air pollution, especially near 
vulnerable sites (schools, childcare centers) and in communities with high rates of asthma and CVD.
Engage in recovery planning with a rebuilding vision that favors active transportation, parks and green 
infrastructure, renewable energy, and planning public space for social cohesion.
160
160
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Preparing for Extreme Weather Events and Population Displacement 
Work with Public Health Emergency Preparedness to ensure plans for extreme heat and climate-related disasters 
include considerations for those with chronic diseases, including medication access during and post disaster.
• 
Work with PHEP and law enforcement to provide information about the risks of heat-related illness and 
mental health exacerbations among the homeless population during an extreme heat event
Community Engagement and Education
Collaborate with CBOs to train community youth and residents to assess healthy food and transportation access, 
and neighborhood green space to provide data in support of strategies that beneﬁt climate and health. 
• 
CX3 provides the data on healthy food availability and affordability that communities need to pursue 
healthy eating options.118  
• 
Healthy Eating Active Living (HEAL) New Hampshire collaborated with Partnerships for Healthy 
Communities to develop a Guide to Conducting Walkability and Bikeability Assessments in New 
Hampshire Communities.119  
Inform clients and encourage health care providers to advise patients about air quality, heat, and climate change, 
and strategies to reduce and manage asthma and CVD risk. Inform clients and providers about:
• 
The impact of heat on CVD medications, including adverse effects, effectiveness and risk for heat 
illness.120   
• 
Information on nearby cooling shelters in the event of extreme heat.
• 
The impacts of ozone and wildﬁre smoke on asthma and cardiovascular health.
 
Check the Air Quality Index for unsafe ozone and PM levels and adjust outdoor activity on bad 
air days for unsafe ozone and particulate levels.121
 
During wildﬁres, advise them to keep windows and doors closed, set air conditioners to 
recirculate and use HEPA air to decrease indoor air pollution. 
 
Keep home and car windows closed on days with bad air related to wildﬁres, high pollen counts, 
and dusty drought conditions.
Integrate climate change into nutrition education and campaigns. See San Luis Obispo OutsideIn SLO 
Curriculum.122  
Ensure that all residents receive information by working with community organizations and cultural leaders 
throughout the development and distribution of outreach and education materials. Make the information 
culturally appropriate and provide information in all languages relevant in your community. In addition:
• 
Use low-literacy formats, multiples formats/channels/outlets such as radio, TV, social media, bus posters, 
community events, worship services.
• 
Address the needs of those with communication impairments.
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
161
161
For More Information
• 
PolicyLink - Equitable Development Toolkit: Local Food Procurement127  
• 
Reconnecting America - Are We There Yet? Creating Complete Communities for 21st Century America128   
• 
Active Living Research - Moving Toward Active Transportation: How Policies Can Encourage Walking and 
Bicycling129  
• 
U.S. EPA -  Reducing Urban Heat Islands: Compendium of Strategies, Cool Pavements130 
Asthma and Respiratory Disease
Assessment and Surveillance
Implement asthma surveillance and monitor environmental contributors to asthma. See CDC’s National 
Environmental Public Health Tracking tool and CSTE’s climate change indicators.131,132    
Implement syndromic surveillance when wildﬁre smoke exposures are high.
Work with air quality agencies and community organizations to implement expanded air quality monitoring 
including through use of low-cost air sensors.133  
Intersectoral Collaboration 
Support air quality management agencies’ actions to reduce air pollution from on and off-road motor vehicles, 
freight, and stationary sources (See Section 4.4—Air Quality and 5—Health Beneﬁts).
Work with planning, housing, public works, transportation, and building agencies to implement strategies to 
reduce near-roadway air pollution exposure, such as siting, speed reduction, vegetation, and ﬁltration.134  
Work with home visiting programs to screen and refer clients for assistance with indoor air quality risks related 
to wildﬁres, drought, or extreme precipitation (leaky pipes, windows and doors, indoor mold) such as air 
conditioning or air ﬁlters. 
Advise schools, camps, and childcare providers to adjust outdoor activities when air quality is bad and to be 
aware that ozone levels increase on hot days. 
Preparing for Extreme Weather Events and Population Displacement 
Work with PHEP and emergency management agencies to ensure that plans are in place for provision of asthma 
medications in any evacuation shelters, and for clean air shelters and distribution of N-95 respirators for serious 
wildﬁre smoke exposure; consider distribution of HEPA ﬁlters to households and facilities at highest risk.
Community Engagement and Education 
Inform communities about the climate-asthma connection and strategies to reduce air and climate co-pollutants. 
Support community science projects that use low-cost air quality monitors to broaden assessment and awareness 
of air quality.
• 
Utah Physicians for a Healthy Environment joined the global Unmask My City initiative that uses portable 
PM2.5 monitors equipped with LED lights that turn red when levels are high.135 
Integrate climate change in messages for the public in health advisories and educational materials. For example:
162
162
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Allergens and Asthma
Original: Pollen comes from trees, ﬂowers, grass, and weeds and can trigger asthma. High 
pollen counts in the spring and fall seasons are known to be asthma triggers for some 
children.136
Modiﬁed: Pollen comes from trees, ﬂowers, grass, and weeds and can trigger asthma. High 
pollen counts in the spring and fall seasons are increasing due to climate change and are 
known to be asthma triggers for some children.
Diabetes
Intersectoral Collaboration
Inform home visiting programs, schools, parent groups, camps, and childcare centers about the impacts of 
extreme heat on insulin and on heat illness risk in people with diabetes.
Prepare for Extreme Heat Events
Work with Emergency Preparedness and emergency management agencies to ensure proper storage capacity for 
insulin and protocols for providing insulin to people with diabetes in cooling centers and evacuation centers, 
Community Engagement and Education
Inform clients and encourage health care providers to advise patients with diabetes on the increased risk of heat 
illness; how to adjust insulin dosage, hydration, and nutrition in response to extreme heat; and impact of heat on 
insulin during extreme heat.
Integrate climate change in routine messages and materials, for example:  
Extreme Heat and Diabetes
Original: We often look forward to changes 
of season, but if you have diabetes, you need 
to be extra careful when temperatures climb 
dramatically. Extreme heat can affect your blood 
sugar control.137
Modiﬁed: We often look forward to changes 
of season, but if you have diabetes, you need 
to be extra careful when temperatures climb 
dramatically. Climate change is causing more 
frequent and severe extreme heat events, which 
can affect your blood sugar control.
Source: Public Health- Seattle King County
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
163
163
Cardiovascular Disease
Intersectoral Collaboration
Collaborate across departments and with other agencies and community organizations to increase access to 
affordable healthy foods and decrease meat consumption.
• 
In Kent County, Michigan, the health department supported the local YMCA in creating a “Veggie Van” to 
provide urban neighborhoods in Grand Rapids with year-round, daily access to fruits and vegetables from 
local farmers, sold at reduced prices. The Veggie Van accepts EBT, SNAP, WIC, and Senior Project Fresh/
Market FRESH beneﬁts.138 
Encourage local health care providers and pharmacies to establish healthy food prescription programs that refer 
people to community resources to support healthy eating, including reduced meat consumption.139  
Encourage institutions such as hospitals, schools, businesses, and government agencies to offer “Less Meat, 
Better Meat”. Provide resources such as the Health Care Without Harm procurement recommendations.140,141    
Community Engagement and Education
Inform providers, clients, and communities about the increased cardiovascular risks associated with heat, 
wildﬁres, and air quality. Also, inform them about the cardiovascular health and climate beneﬁts of reduced meat 
consumption. 
Integrate climate change in messages in health alerts and educational materials. For example:
Air Quality and CVD
Original: It’s National Air Quality Week. AQ is impacted by PM2.5, which can impact the 
cardiovascular system. Visit nmtracking.org for data.142 
Modiﬁed:  It’s National Air Quality Week. AQ is impacted by PM2.5 and higher ground-level 
ozone, which is increasing due to climate change. Poor AQ can impact the cardiovascular 
system. Visit nmtracking.org for data.
164
164
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Spotlight:  
Meat Consumption, Health, and Climate Change 
Meat consumption in the U.S. has doubled over the last century, especially red meats. Diets heavy in 
red and processed meat have been linked to higher rates of heart disease, stroke, Type 2 diabetes, 
obesity, certain cancers, and earlier death.143 
Meat production, processing, distribution and retailing accounts for 9% of U.S. and 15% of global 
GHG.144 Livestock—especially cattle—accounted for 30% of U.S. emissions related to agricultural 
production in 2016.145 The process of raising livestock for meat production in the U.S. also has 
devastating environmental impacts. Communities surrounding concentrated animal feeding 
operations (CAFOs)—frequently low-income communities and communities of color—often have 
poor air quality with high levels of hydrogen sulﬁde and ammonia. Studies have shown increased 
rates of asthma, respiratory illness, depression, and anxiety in these communities.146  
A 2016 study found that reducing meat consumption and eating a more plant-based diet could:147  
• 
Reduce global mortality from chronic disease by 6–10%.
•
Reduce food-related greenhouse gas emissions by 29–70%. 
• 
Save 1–31 trillion U.S. dollars by improving diets.
Mental Illness
Intersectoral Collaboration
Coordinate with local mental health agencies and providers to ensure 
adequate mental health screening, referrals and services during and 
after climate-related extreme events, including droughts.  
Preparing for Extreme Weather Events and Population 
Displacement
Collaborate with Emergency Preparedness to ensure availability of 
mental health services in assistance centers and evacuation shelters, 
including access to psychotropic medications. 
Community Engagement and Education
Inform clients about the impacts of extreme heat on some 
psychotropic medications: Handout on Medications and Heat.148 
Work with community-based organizations and other partners 
to support social cohesion. Social resources, social cohesion, 
and community trust are critical to response and recovery after 
disasters. Following Superstorm Sandy, poorer neighborhoods with 
abundant social resources proved to be more resilient than wealthy 
neighborhoods with low social resources.149
Source: Public Health- Seattle King County
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
165
165
Injuries
Intersectoral Collaboration
Work with other agencies, employers, and labor unions to support policies and standards that protect workers in 
the face of a changing climate.
• 
Inform outdoor workers about the risks of heat illness and protective measures (water, shade, rest) to 
prevent it.150,151    
Work with planning and public Works to implement safe active transportation infrastructure and other programs 
to decrease the risk of bike and pedestrian injuries (e.g. reduced speed zones).
Preparing for Extreme Weather Events and Population Displacement
Collaborate with emergency responders, public safety workers, utility workers and others to reduce the risks of 
injury related to extreme weather events.
Community Engagement and Education
Integrate climate change in materials and messages including health alerts public health alerts, health advisory 
announcements, and educational materials and campaigns related to air quality.
Flooding
Original: Winter weather and ﬂooding can cause power outages. Call your local power 
company to report outages.152 
Modiﬁed:  Winter weather and ﬂooding, which are become more severe and frequent 
due to climate change, can cause power outages. Call your local power company to report 
outages. If you use a generator, make sure to place it outside the home. 
166
166
From Collaboration 
to Action: 
Philadelphia Department 
of Public Health
Philadelphia is a sprawling city with a diverse population (42% African American) of over 1.5 million people. 
Philadelphia city government developed its ﬁrst climate action plan in 2007. The Philadelphia Department of 
Public Health (PDPH) participated in the greenhouse gas inventory, but only more recently has it addressed more 
explicitly the human health impacts of climate change climate change. 
In early 2016, PDPH convened its ﬁrst Climate Change and Health Advisory Group (CCHAG) with over 34 
representatives from a diverse array of community-based organizations, health care systems, local and regional 
government agencies, and academic partners. CCHAG established a unique space for diverse stakeholders to 
learn from one another and prioritize collaborative action to address climate, health, and equity. Participants 
identiﬁed several priorities, including asthma, extreme heat, and ﬂooding, and an overarching concern about 
climate impacts on Philadelphia’s most vulnerable communities.
A CCHAG Asthma subcommittee compiled data and maps to identify zip codes with high asthma emergency 
room use. PDPH and CCHAG member Asociacion de Puertorriquenos en Marcha developed culturally competent 
materials for patients and service providers about the impact of climate change on asthma, and strategies to 
reduce asthma risks in a changing climate. Materials were disseminated by Drexel University, the Clean Air 
Council, St. Christopher’s Hospital for Children, the National Nurse-Led Care Consortium, Temple’s Health 
Homes program, the Philadelphia School District, and others. The CCHAG Asthma Subcommittee met with 
the Pennsylvania Horticultural Society and U.S. Forest Service to explore how urban greening programs could 
integrate considerations of the rising risks of allergy due to the impacts of climate change on pollen levels.
PHPP also launched an Extreme Heat Workgroup with the Ofﬁce of Emergency Management to review the 
City’s Excessive Heat Plan. In partnership with graduate students at a local university, PDPH developed a heat 
vulnerability index and maps of vulnerable neighborhoods. An update of the City’s Excessive Heat Plan—
informed by projected increases in summer temperatures and more intense heat events of longer duration—
addresses the disproportionate impacts of heat on vulnerable residents with strategies such as activating cooling 
centers and spraygrounds that are accessible to neighborhoods where risk for adverse health outcomes is 
higher. Agencies agreed to redesign heat warnings so that all city agencies use the same language—“heat health 
warning” and “heat health emergency”—so that residents more clearly understand the level of risk. During heat 
health emergencies, the City requires that residential utility shutoffs are stopped, and may dispatch mobile heat 
health teams to high-risk neighborhoods.
The PHPP team also collaborated with the Franklin Institute to integrate discussions of heat health risks and 
vulnerabilities into an innovative demonstration of how typical climate effects and mitigation strategies impacts 
temperature in classic-style Philadelphia row houses.
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
167
167
167
Climate Urban Systems Partnership
The Climate Urban Systems Partnership 
(CUSP) is a collaborative project funded by the 
National Science Foundation to explore novel 
approaches to community climate education 
in four cities. In Philadelphia, CUSP and 
PDPH worked with the Franklin Institute to 
conduct  community workshops on climate 
change, extreme heat, and health in summer 
of 2017, using the row house demonstrations. 
Following Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and 
Maria, PDPH worked with its partners to map 
ﬂood-vulnerable areas and held community 
workshops to discuss ﬂood vulnerability and 
resilience strategies. In 2018, CUSP will host 
additional community workshops focused on 
climate change, severe storms and ﬂooding, 
and health. 
Future Work and Lessons Learned
PDPH—in collaboration wit the Mayor’s 
Ofﬁce of Sustainability—will use the heat 
vulnerability maps to identify high-risk 
neighborhoods and work with community 
based organizations to prioritize and 
implement interventions to reduce urban heat, 
including cool roofs, green space, and better 
access to cooling centers and spraygrounds. 
PDPH will continue to work with the CCHAG 
and many diverse stakeholders who together 
have demonstrated the power of robust 
partnerships to advance efforts to improve 
community climate resilience.  
For More Information
• 
Growing Stronger: Toward a Climate 
Ready Philadelphia
• Identify key stakeholders and form a 
Climate Change and Health Advisory 
Group (CCHAG) with CBOs, local 
government agencies, health care 
providers, and academic partners, to 
prioritize strategies and solutions
• Support local CBOs to develop culturally 
appropriate materials on climate and 
health and conduct community workshops
• Partner with local academic institutions to 
assess and map climate vulnerability. 
Key Action Steps:
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
168
168
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
6.5 Public Health Emergency Preparedness 
Every LHD engages in public health emergency preparedness, using an “all-hazards” approach that combines 
planning, exercises, training, and community education to prepare the LHD, ﬁrst responders, the local health  
care system, and the community to prepare, respond, and recover effectively from public health emergencies 
ranging from infectious disease or radiation emergencies to terrorism/bioterrorism to earthquakes and extreme 
weather events. 
As awareness has grown that community risk results from an interplay of the magnitude of an emergency event 
and the level of community vulnerability, many LHD PHEP have shifted from a focus on emergency response to 
a more holistic approach that emphasizes community preparedness, risk reduction, and community resilience. 
Climate change makes it more important than ever that PHEP programs embrace a broad and intersectoral 
approach that endeavors: 
“…to prevent new and reduce existing disaster risk through the implementation of integrated and 
inclusive economic, structural, legal, social, health, cultural, educational, environmental, technological, 
political and institutional measures that prevent and reduce hazard exposure and vulnerability to 
disaster, increase preparedness for response and recovery, and thus strengthen resilience.”1      
– Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
Climate Change Poses New Challenges for Public Health Emergency Preparedness
Climate change is increasing the frequency and severity of extreme weather events. 
Wildﬁres: Climate change causes higher temperatures, earlier snowmelt, and drier conditions that increase 
the frequency, intensity and duration of wildﬁres, as well as the length of wildﬁre season in the U.S.2 Wildﬁre 
seasons are expected to be longer and stronger across all regions of the U.S. by 2050.3 More people and homes 
are at risk with increasing development of the wildland-urban interface.4  
Fire Fighters and emergency personal rush to control ﬁres in Brea CA. 
mikeledray / Shutterstock.com
Army Spc. Rafael Agudo, a UH-60 Black Hawk mechanic, washes a 
helicopter to prepare it for a disaster response mission.  
U.S. Air National Guard photo by Senior Airman Crystal Housman 
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
169
169
Extreme precipitation: The number of extreme precipitation events is expected to increase by two to three times 
historical averages in every U.S. region by 2100, and these events are likely to increase in intensity by 6% to 7% 
for each degree Celsius of temperature increase.5  
• 
In the U.S., the average 100-year ﬂoodplain is projected to increase 45 percent by the year 2100.6 
• 
Climate change is expected to make “atmospheric rivers” wider and longer.7  
Heat: As global temperatures rise due to climate change, extreme heat events are increasing in frequency, 
severity, and duration. Seventeen of the eighteen warmest years on record have occurred since 2001.8 In 2017, 
extreme heat events shattered records across the U.S. and every state had an annual average temperature that 
was warmer than usual.10 There has also been a dramatic increase in hot night-time temperatures in the US, 
reducing critical hours of relief during heat waves.10  
Key Messages
Why Public Health Emergency Preparedness Should Care
• 
Climate change is increasing the frequency and severity of extreme weather events, including 
sequential emergencies, compounding emergencies, and slow-moving emergencies, all of 
which increase the need for comprehensive equity-oriented emergency planning, response, and 
recovery.
• 
Climate change exacerbates existing health, social, and economic inequities. Low-income 
communities and communities of color already bear disproportionate burdens of negative 
health impacts, and are less able to recover following a climate-related emergency.
• 
Public Health Emergency Preparedness programs are uniquely positioned to not only incorporate 
climate change impacts into emergency preparedness and response, but also advance 
community-driven climate resilience in preparedness recovery and rebuilding planning.
What Public Health Emergency Preparedness Can Do
• 
Enhance surveillance and mapping of demographic changes, disease prevalence, and vulnerable 
populations, infrastructure, and industry to improve disaster preparedness, response, and 
recovery in the face of climate change. 
• 
Collaborate with other agencies, healthcare facilities and systems, and community-based 
organizations to increase health system and community resilience, while promoting GHGE 
reduction strategies with health and equity beneﬁts.
• 
Prepare displacement, shelter, and recovery protocols speciﬁcally for vulnerable populations 
in cases of extreme weather events and disasters including children, elderly, people with 
disabilities, people with chronic diseases, people with compromised immune systems, migrant 
laborers, homeless people, and LGBTQ communities.
170
170
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Climate change increases the likelihood of sequential emergencies.
• 
Greater variability in temperature and precipitation creates more contrast between drought and wet years, 
which can result in a signiﬁcant increase in the severity and frequency of wildﬁres and mudslides.11  
• 
Increasing frequency of extreme weather events heightens the likelihood that a new severe event will 
occur before full recovery from a prior event, and fosters “evacuation fatigue” making people tire of 
taking full precautions with each event.12  
Climate change increases the possibility of “compounding” emergencies. Prolonged and/or extreme summer heat 
exacerbates the impacts of drought, increases ozone levels and the risk of wildﬁre, which in turn further worsens 
air quality. 
Climate change is contributing to slow-moving emergencies. “Slow-moving” or “slow-onset” emergencies creep 
up on communities; the perception that there is “still time” may contribute to insufﬁcient early action. 
“A slow-onset emergency is deﬁned as one that does not emerge from a single, distinct event but one 
that emerges gradually over time, often based on a conﬂuence of different events.”13   
Sea level rise: All U.S. coastlines outside of Alaska are expected to see higher sea level rise than the global 
average. Sea level rise in the U.S. will increase the frequency and extent of extreme coastal ﬂooding and coastal 
erosion, threatening tens of thousands of homes.14  
• 
Without signiﬁcant mitigation efforts there is a 67 percent probability that the San Francisco Bay Area 
will experience sea level rise of 1.6 to 3.4 feet by 2100. New scientiﬁc evidence has highlighted the 
potential for extreme sea-level rise; ice losses from Antarctica have tripled since 2012 and are causing sea 
levels to rise faster today than at any time in the past 25 years.15,16    
As sea levels rise, saltwater intrusion into fresh water increases salinity of groundwater basins and well water.  
Higher salinity in drinking water has been associated with increased blood pressure and kidney disease; and, in 
Bangladesh, with higher risk of preeclampsia and gestational hypertension.17,18 High salinity in groundwater in 
agricultural areas reduces crop yields.
“Preparing for sea-level rise will be expensive, but the price will be far lower than the alternative of 
waiting and reacting to these impacts as they occur. Planning should include consideration of both 
sea-level rise and extreme events.”19  
Drought: The frequency, severity, and duration of droughts is increasing due to less total precipitation, higher 
temperatures that increase evaporation rates, a higher proportion of precipitation as rain instead of snow, and 
less snowpack with more and earlier spring runoff.20,21,22 The U.S. Southwest has already shifted to a much 
drier climate; the American West may experience a “mega-drought” lasting decades in the latter half of this 
century.23 While the U.S. Dust Bowl in the 1930s lasted a decade, NASA analyses have found that future droughts 
throughout the U.S. may last at least 30 to 35 years, resulting in the driest periods of these regions in the last 
1,000 years.24,25   
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
171
171
“This is the new normal. We’re facing a new reality where ﬁres threaten peoples’ lives, their properties, 
their neighborhoods and cost billions and billions of dollars…There have been very long droughts 
in California and we are getting some of those returning very badly, and we’re going to get them 
retuning more often. And then, with climate change, some scientists are saying California is literally 
burning up.”26
– California Governor Jerry Brown 
Climate-Related Emergencies and Health Equity
Climate-related disasters hit the poor the hardest. Pre-disaster conditions in many communities are sub-optimal, 
and existing health and social inequities place some individuals and communities at greater risk of suffering 
health and other impacts from climate-related disasters. Climate change provides an opportunity for LHDs to 
pay more attention to disaster risk management and community resilience, so that all communities are prepared, 
resilient, and able to transform and thrive in the face of the impacts of climate change. 
•
In many low-income and historically disenfranchised communities aging and poorly maintained 
infrastructure increases the risk of ﬂooding and other disasters.27
• 
Low-income households are less likely to have disaster insurance, less able to recover from ﬂooding and 
property loss associated with SLR, and have fewer resources to relocate.28   
• 
Undocumented immigrants are ineligible for FEMA assistance, but can apply for assistance on behalf of 
documented members of their household. However, as was evidenced in Sonoma County, during the 2017 
wildﬁres, many ‘mixed-status’ families opted out of FEMA assistance due to fear that family information 
and status would be shared with immigration ofﬁcials.29 
• 
Agricultural workers and communities are more vulnerable to the adverse economic impacts of drought 
including job loss and food and water insecurity. 
• 
In some regions, beachfront neighborhoods have historically been restricted to white homeowners. 
In Miami there is concern that, as nuisance ﬂooding due to SLR becomes more common, wealthier 
homeowners are moving to higher ground, potentially displacing lower income communities of color.30  
“Disaster risk reduction requires an all-of-society engagement and partnership. It also requires 
empowerment and inclusive, accessible and non-discriminatory participation, paying special attention 
to people disproportionately affected by disasters, especially the poorest. A gender, age, disability 
and cultural perspective should be integrated in all policies and practices, and women and youth 
leadership should be promoted. In this context, special attention should be paid to the improvement 
of organized voluntary work of citizens.”31    
– Sendai Framework
Recovery, rehabilitation, and reconstruction after a disaster provide opportunities to “Build Back Better,” both 
through integrating disaster risk reduction considerations into rebuilding, and through using rebuilding to redress 
any long-standing inequities in community development and infrastructure.
172
172
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Inclusive Rebuilding After Northern California Fires—Sonoma County, CA
In October 2017, wildﬁres raged across Sonoma County CA, displacing thousands, killing 44 people, 
destroying 5100 homes and demonstrating the challenges of responding to the disaster needs of immigrant 
populations. News reports suggest that county ofﬁcials struggled to send evacuation alerts and disaster 
information in Spanish, placing Spanish-speaking families at greater risk and impacting their ability to 
effectively seek support during and after the ﬁres.32   
The roughly 38,500 undocumented immigrants in Sonoma County faced particular challenges after the 
ﬁres.33 “Undocumented immigrants do not qualify for assistance from the Federal Emergency Management 
Agency (FEMA). Even when they or their children are eligible for disaster relief services, their lack of 
immigration status, limited English proﬁciency, and fear of immigration enforcement prevent them from 
seeking assistance. Their discomfort or lack of familiarity with law enforcement, county government, and 
mainstream aid organizations present additional barriers…[they] predominantly work in sectors that have 
been or will be hard hit, including service, hospitality, child and elder care, day labor, wine, and agriculture 
more broadly. Many lost wages in the weeks following the ﬁres, and others worked for companies whose 
operations were affected at varying levels, from temporary disruption to complete loss.”34
The disaster highlighted the need for greater community engagement in emergency preparedness, response, 
and long-term recovery. Sonoma County Rises / Sonoma County Se Levanta, a community based coalition 
that sprang up after the ﬁres, is intent on putting equity at the center of decision-making and bringing the 
voices of all members of the community into the recovery and rebuilding process.35,36 Whether that will be 
successful is still an open question.
An Equitable Path for Rebuilding—Galveston, TX
In September 2008, Hurricane Ike hit Galveston, Texas with 110mph winds and a 22-foot storm surge, 
damaging or destroying 70% of the buildings on the island-city.37 Two neighborhoods facing the worst 
devastation were those with the highest poverty levels, low access to healthy foods, and high levels of 
pollution from neighboring industries.38 To date, rebuilding these areas is proceeding slower than on other 
parts of the island, as money earmarked to rebuild public housing remains unspent and efforts to build back 
these neighborhoods are stalled.39,40 Of the 544 families displaced from public housing, only 101 had returned 
as of mid-2018.41 The stall in public housing construction dramatically impacted the demographic makeup of 
the island, as the communities of color who primarily inhabited these regions before the storm now have no 
homes to return to.42 
In 2014, a health impact assessment (HIA) was conducted to assess how Hurricane Ike recovery efforts might 
support health equity through public housing and neighborhood development.43 The HIA recommended 
that health impacts be incorporated into the process for designing new scattered site housing and that 
speciﬁc needs (e.g. toxics exposures, transportation and schools proximity, crime prevention) be included.44
The team also recommended more input from affected community members, through a coordinated multi-
stakeholder initiative to address neighborhood needs.45 Though yet to be fully funded, the recommendations 
provide guidance for equity-focused recovery and rebuilding following climate-related disasters.
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
173
173
Hurricanes Hit the Poor the Hardest—New Orleans, LA
A recent Brookings Institute report documents three key ways in which hurricanes hit the poor the hardest:
•
Lower income people are more likely to live in neighborhoods or buildings with substandard 
infrastructure, more susceptible to storm shocks. Poor families were more concentrated in ﬂood-
prone parts of Houston before Hurricane Irma. Low-income and minority families often live closer to 
industrial facilities, placing them at higher risk of toxic leaks or spills from storm damage.46
• 
Poorer families are less well insulated against economic shock associated with disasters. Only 17% 
of homeowners had ﬂood insurance policies (held more commonly by wealthier households) in the 
areas most affected by Hurricane Harvey. Ten years after Hurricane Katrina, residents whose homes 
ﬂooded during the storm had lower credit scores and rates of home ownership than other New 
Orleans residents.47  
• 
Greater afﬂuence makes relocation to safer areas easier. Following severe disasters, county-level 
poverty rates increase and housing prices decline. Either wealthier residents are moving out and 
poor people are migrating in, or pre-disaster residents area transitioning into poverty after a severe 
weather event. 
Conclusion: “Severe weather shocks exacerbate inequality.”
What Local Health Departments Can Do
Assessment and Surveillance
A climate, health, and equity vulnerability assessment (CHEVA) is the foundation for integration of climate 
change into public health emergency preparedness (See Section 7.1—Surveillance). In California, Senate Bill 
379 (2015) requires local jurisdictions to address climate adaptation and resiliency strategies in their hazard 
mitigation plans or in the safety element of their general plan.48  
Collaborate with LHD epidemiology and assessment colleagues, local emergency management and planning 
agencies to develop climate vulnerability assessments. 
• 
Identify high-risk populations, structures, and industries. Whether an extreme weather event becomes 
a public health emergency is largely dependent on the pre-existing conditions and resiliency of a 
community. Assessing vulnerability and resiliency prior to an emergency reduces the potential negative 
impacts.49  
Identify at-risk individuals (e.g. limited mobility, socially isolated) and residences (e.g. skilled 
nursing and assisted-living facilities) and develop proactive strategies to address their needs in an 
extreme event.
 
After Hurricane Irma knocked out power and air conditioning, eleven people died in a 
Florida nursing home.50  
 
Map the location of facilities that use and store toxic chemicals that may increase exposure risks 
in an extreme event. 
174
174
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
• 
Use community-based participatory research to engage youth and community residents in selecting 
indicators, surveying residents, mapping community assets, and identifying solutions to risks identiﬁed in 
the CHEVA.
• 
Integrate CHEVA results into PHEP and local hazard mitigation plans. 
Use the CDC’s CASPER Toolkit to assess immediate and long-term impacts and on-going community needs 
following a disaster.51 The CASPER methodology can also be used in Community Health Assessments (See 
Section 7.1—Surveillance). 
Integrate Climate Vulnerability Information into PHEP Planning
Make sure contingency plans address all potential climate-related disasters, for example:
• 
Be prepared for shelter needs speciﬁc to various climate-related events. 
 
Plan for “clean air” shelters for wildﬁres and smoke—facilities with tight-sealing windows and 
doors and ventilation systems that signiﬁcantly reduce intake of outdoor air.52,53    
 
Identify shelters that are well out of potential ﬂood zones 
• 
Use information on urban heat islands and heat vulnerability to identify neighborhoods and facilities for 
targeted outreach in an extreme heat event and to locate accessible cooling centers.
 
See EPA’s Extreme Heat - Incident Action Checklist and this Extreme Heat Toolkit from Wisconsin 
Department of Health Services.54,55    
• 
Develop ﬂood plans that use up-to-date projections on ﬂood inundation zones; integrate information on 
facilities with hazardous materials and on sewage and drinking water infrastructure vulnerability. 
• 
Be prepared for longer and more severe wildﬁre seasons  
 
See Oregon’s Wildﬁre Response Protocol for Severe Smoke Episodes for examples of partners, 
actions, and communications (See Section 4.3—Wildﬁres).56  
Prepare displacement and shelter protocols speciﬁcally for vulnerable populations in cases of extreme weather 
events and wildﬁres including children, elderly, people with disabilities, people with chronic diseases, people 
with compromised immune systems, migrant laborers, homeless people, and LGBTQ communities.
Work with Infectious Disease to plan for appropriate immunizations for evacuees and displaced persons. See the 
CDC’s recommendations on immunizations.66   
• 
Inform providers about infectious risks related to ﬂoods
• 
Inform Medical Reserve Corps of tetanus and HepB vaccines recommendations for disaster responders.67   
• 
Prepare for enhanced medication and vaccine cold chain protection as extreme events and heat can 
disrupt power and refrigeration.68  
Collaborate with LHD colleagues to provide surveillance for early detection of disaster-related infectious disease 
outbreaks associated with water or food contamination or increased vector activity due to climate-related 
extreme events. 
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
175
175
Collaborate with hospitals, nursing homes, prisons, and other group living facilities to establish protocols for 
climate-related extreme events, including evacuation plans and power outages during heat waves. 
• 
Plan for home recovery actions to remove mold and debris safely.
Communications and Education
Clear, timely, accessible, and culturally and linguistically appropriate communication and robust community 
engagement are core elements of public health emergency planning and response.
Collaborate with community based and neighborhood organizations to engage residents in all neighborhoods in 
emergency preparedness and planning, including training and exercises.69 
• 
Provide ﬁnancial support for trainings and events in under-resourced communities; provide these in 
accessible locations for vulnerable groups. Offer transportation, food, childcare, and translation services 
to encourage participation.
Ensure that plans include a suite of communications tools for use in various climate-related emergencies, 
including Health Ofﬁcer orders, alerts, evacuation orders, and information notices. 
LGBTQ Populations and Climate Emergencies
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer (LGBTQ) communities have unique needs and 
vulnerabilities during and following climate-related emergencies.57 
• 
LGBTQ young adults are more than 120 times more likely to report homelessness compared to 
their heterosexual and cisgender peers, putting them at greater risk for heat illness, injury and 
displacement during emergencies.58  
• 
LGBTQ seniors are more likely to be socially isolated than other seniors, increasing risk of illness 
or death in an emergency.59  
• 
LGBTQ couples and families may live in a state or be evacuated to a state that does not 
recognize same-sex marriage, second-parents or joint adoption, which may make it more 
difﬁcult to access resources for families or be reuniﬁed with family members.60 
•
Destruction of safe community spaces and displacement from individual homes and 
neighborhoods can place LGBTQ people at greater risk of harassment, including in shelters.61
• 
Emergency response protocols, evacuation procedures, and emergency shelter policies are 
generally designed for heterosexual and cisgender populations, which can “heighten the 
vulnerability of groups already facing discrimination and marginalization,” and lead to lower 
use of shelters and other resources.62
 
For example, strict “male” and “female” divisions in emergency housing and sanitary 
facilities can be problematic for LGBTQ people and may lead to denial of services, 
discrimination and violence.63  
176
176
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Ensure communications plans include outreach, language barriers, legal status (immigration status, age, 
guardianship/vulnerable adults) and occupation. 
• 
Establish an accessible information hotline for residents with multiple language options.
• 
Ensure that all orders are translated in advance into the languages used in your jurisdiction, and have 
plans in place for translators during emergency events. 
 
During the Thomas Fire in Ventura County (CA) in December 2017, a Boil Water order was posted 
in English on December 5, while the advisory in Spanish was not posted until December 6.70  
• 
Collaborate with local CBO and/or advocacy organization that can access and communicate with 
vulnerable populations who may be uncomfortable seeking information or assistance from local 
government agencies 
LGBTQ Populations and Climate Emergencies
What Local Health Departments Can Do
Public Health Emergency Preparedness programs and other emergency management agencies can 
implement simple strategies in improve physical and mental health outcomes for LBGTQ people 
during and after climate-related emergencies: 
• 
Collaborate with LGBTQ community organizations and community members to ensure 
individuals and families have emergency preparedness plans in place.
 
Share the Family Equality Council’s Disaster Preparedness for Families with Parents Who 
are LGBT with community groups and leaders, and care providers.64 
• 
Include LGBTQ community organizations and community members in emergency preparedness 
planning to ensure unique vulnerabilities and needs are included in emergency plans and policies
• 
Collaborate with LGBTQ community organizations and media organizations to ensure culturally 
appropriate emergency messages are distributed to the community
• 
Facilitate training for LHD staff and other emergency management agencies in culturally 
competent emergency response protocols for LGBTQ populations
 
Use and disseminate the Human Rights Campaign’s Working with the LGBT Community: 
A Cultural Competence Guide for Emergency Responders and Volunteers.65 
• 
Collaborate with emergency management agencies, evacuation shelter coordinators and 
volunteers to create safe spaces for LGBTQ people, including housing and sanitation facilities.
• 
Work with Medical Reserve Cops and other service providers to ensure adequate services—
including mental health services—are available to LGBTQ populations.
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
177
177
Work with other emergency management agencies and local news broadcasters to agree on common language for 
use in communicating levels of risk to the public.
• 
The Philadelphia Department of Public Health collaborated with agencies to establish an agreement on 
common language for extreme heat warning systems, in order to reduce confusion among the public and 
agency partners. 
Communicate with impacted communities about the hazards that remain after the acute disaster (e.g. toxic ash 
in wildﬁre debris, water contamination after wildﬁre, mold risks following ﬂooding).71 
• 
Inform residents, workers, and businesses about appropriate personal protective equipment during 
cleanup.
Communicate and collaborate with ﬁrst responder agencies to provide enhanced training and equipment in the 
face of emergency conditions that may be hotter, more severe, more extensive and more extreme due to climate 
change. 
Collaborate with Health Care Providers and Systems
Work with your provider community to ensure awareness of climate-related risks and to encourage provider 
participation in surge capacity planning/training.
• 
Integrate climate projections into your assessment of medical surge capacity needs to ensure there are 
adequate personnel, pharmaceuticals, and medical support devices to accommodate more frequent and 
severe climate-related emergencies.
 
Ensure emergency plans include clinical triage systems and environmental health considerations.
 
Ensure there are adequate personnel, pharmaceuticals, and medical support devices to 
accommodate more frequent and severe climate-related emergencies.
 
Ensure power continuity to clinical facilities and settings with institutionalized or sensitive 
populations during outages
• 
Ensure a robust network of mental health/behavioral health service providers, including access to 
pharmaceuticals.
 
Work with mental health services providers before a disaster to ensure that they are fully 
integrated into Medical Reserve Corps and medical surge capacity planning, and ensure mental 
health services are available in shelters (and recovery assistance centers).
 
Seek out mental health services providers who can provide services in the languages spoken in 
your community.
 
Children and youth are more at risk for severe mental health consequences and trauma post 
climate-intensiﬁed extreme events. Planning should establish networks of pediatric support for 
trauma and mental health care.
178
178
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Community Engagement and Community-Driven Resilience
Community-driven resilience refers to full engagement of community residents to:73  
• 
create a vision of climate resilience based in community priorities; 
• 
participate in assessment of climate vulnerability and assets, including selection of indicators 
• 
prioritize problems 
• 
select and implement solutions that incorporate community experience and knowledge
LHD PHEP programs can help to build resilience.
• 
Actively engage residents in a climate and health vulnerability assessment that incorporates climate risk 
and identiﬁes populations most vulnerable in the face of climate-related emergencies.
• 
Build robust community engagement into public health emergency planning, including the most 
vulnerable and historically disenfranchised groups and neighborhoods. 
• 
Integrate and support activities that build social cohesion within and across different segments of the 
community. 
• 
Support the integration of health, equity, and sustainability into jurisdiction planning, investments, and 
post-disaster recovery and rebuilding.
Building Climate Resilience
As climate-related disasters become more frequent and more severe, the role of community climate 
resilience becomes ever more important so that local response capabilities are not overwhelmed. A 
resilient community:72   
• 
Is committed to the transformative change required to build a healthy, equitable, and 
sustainable community.
• 
Takes action to build individual and collective capacity to recognize problems and to respond 
proactively to and inﬂuence social, economic, and environmental change.
• 
Nurtures diversity, respects the experience and knowledge of all community members, and 
proactively engages all segments of a community in understanding and responding to change.
•
Fosters social cohesion and collaboration across networks through bonding, bridging and linking.
• 
Builds community capitals including economic, social, built, political, and environmental capitals.
• 
Supports investment in physical infrastructures and services that meet the needs of all residents. 
• 
Recognizes the value of environmental resources and works to protect, enhance, and  
maintain them.
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
179
179
Community Cohesion Saves Lives
Sociologist Eric Klinenberg ﬁnds that social cohesion protects people from natural disasters. During the 1995 
Chicago heat wave, two adjacent, low economic, nearly demographically identical neighborhoods reported 
very different fatality rates, with Englewood at 33 per 100,000 residents and Auburn Gresham at 3 per 
100,000 (one of the lowest in the city). 
Why the difference? Klinenberg observed that Auburn Gresham has “sidewalks, stores, restaurants, and 
community organizations that bring people into contact with friends and neighbors.” Whereas Englewood 
had lost over half of its population due to disinvestment and neglect over the previous 30 years.
After Superstorm Sandy, Klinenberg found that organizations with deep community ties were able to get 
assistance into neighborhoods even before government aid was fully mobilized. In boroughs with multiple 
strong networks, even when the networks came from different backgrounds, their intrinsic strength made 
them all able to join in and collaborate for recovery efforts.74  
Intersectoral Collaboration for Community Climate Resilience
“Our hospitals and clinics need to be resilient and fortiﬁed so they can anchor the community 
response during extreme weather events. They need to be the last buildings standing in a hurricane 
rather than one of the ﬁrst ones to go down.”75
– Gary Cohen, Health Care Without Harm
As the frequency and severity of extreme events increases, it is ever more important to increase health care 
system resilience to allow uninterrupted provision of emergency medical services during and immediately 
following extreme events and mental health services.76 LHDs can encourage public and private health services 
providers to proactively collaborate to assess regional health system vulnerability and resilience and to develop 
plans for assuring continued access to health services in the event of extreme events (See Section 6.6—Clinical 
Services). 
• 
Educate health care providers and health care systems managers about climate impacts and the need to 
be prepared for more frequent and severe climate-related emergencies.
• 
Inform nursing homes, schools, and clinics about roles and actions to prepare for and respond to climate-
related emergencies.
• 
Work with health care leaders to assess and improve health care system resilience (e.g. back up power 
and water, evacuation protocols) 
• 
Encourage health care facilities to implement renewable and on-site energy systems and green buildings, 
and to locate new facilities in climate-safe and transit accessible locations.
See: NIEHS - Primary Protection: Enhancing Health Care Resilience for a Changing Climate77 and WHO - 
Operational Framework for Building Climate Resilient Health Systems78   
180
180
Collaborate with public works, parks, and planning departments 
to implement heat island mitigation strategies, especially in heat 
vulnerable communities (See Sections 5.4—Urban Greening and 5—
Health Beneﬁts). 
Collaborate with public works, planning, and sanitation agencies 
to develop strategies to reduce ﬂood risk, especially in ﬂood 
vulnerable communities and those with aging water and sewage 
infrastructure (e.g. use of green infrastructure to capture storm 
water, ﬂood plain development restrictions, building codes 
that require elevation in areas at risk of ﬂooding). Review and 
disseminate EPA’s Flood Resilience Checklist to local CBOs and 
other partners (See Section 4.7—Storms and Flooding). 
Work with local water districts, water utilities, planning and 
environmental health to assess drought and salt water intrusion 
risks, identify communities most at risk, and develop strategies 
to reduce drought risk and to protect and conserve ground 
and surface water sources (e.g. water conservation and reuse, 
watershed management, connection of small or private systems to 
larger water systems, equitable water rates). 
• 
Review and disseminate information from EPA’s Climate Ready Water Utilities Initiative to local drinking 
water, wastewater, and storm water utilities (See Section 4.2—Drought).
Before a disaster, collaborate with community partners and other agencies to develop a vision for a healthy, 
equitable, and sustainable community that can guide preparedness and recovery planning. After a disaster, work 
with other LHD programs, agencies, and community based organizations to establish a recovery and rebuilding 
plan based on that vision.
Public Health Emergency Preparedness and Climate Mitigation
Without signiﬁcant and rapid reductions in GHGE, the risk is growing that the impacts of climate change will 
surpass our capacity to adapt and respond. Climate scientists forecast that temperatures in large parts of the 
Middle East will exceed the human body’s physiological capacity to adapt, precluding rapid GHGE mitigations.79 
As GHG levels in the atmosphere continue to rise, so does the probability of surpassing “tipping points” that 
increase the risk of accelerated and unstoppable climate changes. Failure to act now to mitigate climate change 
thus risks impacts that will surpass our ability to adapt or respond and will place signiﬁcant health, economic, 
and social burdens on society.80  
Local public health preparedness programs play a critical role in helping the public and policy makers understand 
that our ability to protect human life and well-being in the face of climate-related disasters is not limitless, and 
that the best way to prepare for public health emergencies is to prevent them from happening in the ﬁrst place. 
Just as LHDs may use a measles outbreak to remind parents to vaccinate their children, it’s important to remind 
communities that taking action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is an important component of emergency 
preparedness. 
East Harlem COAD Leadership Team Members
ioby.org
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
181
181
Strengthening  
Community Networks:  
New Orleans Health 
Department 
New Orleans (NOLA)—a city of 350,000—sits near the mouth of the Mississippi River and the edge of the Gulf 
of Mexico. In recent years, NOLA has seen clearly the worsening impacts of climate change, including Hurricane 
Katrina, extreme heat events, and increasing mosquito populations, but only recently has the New Orleans Health 
Department (NOHD) more proactively addressed the impacts of climate change on health. 
NOHD used a CDC framework (BRACE) and consulted with local and state climatologists to understand climate 
change projections and associated health impacts, focusing on heat, vectors, and air quality. NOHD staff then 
compiled and mapped climate vulnerability and health risk to identify neighborhoods most vulnerable to the 
adverse health impacts of climate change. This provided the foundation for further engagement with NOHD 
staff (including a training on climate and health for over 75 staff), other City agencies and community based 
organizations interested in climate resilience and equity in NOLA. 
NOHD partnered with the Gulf Coast Center for Law & Policy (GCCLP) to host three community meetings in 
neighborhoods identiﬁed by the climate and health vulnerability assessment as most vulnerable. The overall goal 
of the meetings was to build community capacity to take community-led action on climate change to improve 
health and equity. The meetings were structured to: 1) map participants’ knowledge of GNOs’ extreme weather 
response protocol; 2) communicate impacts of climate change on health; 3) identify community health service 
needs and prioritize community action steps that address the intersection of climate and health; 4) strengthen 
participants’ ability for increased civic participation; and 5) collect and deliver community recommendations to 
address the impact of climate change on health in at-risk communities in New Orleans. 
After the meetings, GCCLP shared recommendations with NOHD:
• 
Build trust, in light of residents’ concerns about how well the City will protect them in a climate-related 
disaster—based on the Katrina experience. 
• 
Invest in community cohesion by supporting neighborhood groups with physical, ﬁnancial, and 
educational resources and strengthening community networks to equip communities to bounce back from 
extreme weather events. 
The vulnerability assessment and community meetings informed the development of a draft NOHD Climate 
Adaptation Plan, and NOHD participation in drafting the New Orleans Climate Action Plan, which addresses 
climate mitigation strategies with health beneﬁts, such as active transportation.81 The New Orleans Community 
Health Needs Assessment and the Community Health Improvement Plan also now include—under the goal to  
“Create social and physical environments that promote good health for all”—an objective to “reduce the impact 
of climate change on the health of New Orleans communities and vulnerable populations.”  
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
182
182
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
for a Resilient New Orleans
Climate 
Action
182
“The climate and health vulnerability 
assessment and the community meetings 
really gave health a seat at the table 
and provided so many others with the 
information they needed to understand 
not just how climate change affects health 
but why people and health have to be at 
the center of climate resilience.” 
– Sarah Babcock, NOHD Health 
Population and Planning Manager 
Future Work and Lessons Learned
NOHD now plans to augment available data 
on heat illness and heat vulnerability through 
collaborating with a local CBO to collect 
temperature data from sensors placed in 
neighborhoods facing health inequities and 
built environments that foster urban heat 
islands. Additionally, NOHD will expand 
and update its heat outreach campaign, and 
continue in the role of front-line responder to 
climate-related disasters.
For More Information
• 
Climate Changes Health Overview – 
New Orleans Department of Health82  
• Work with local and state agencies to 
compile climate and health data to 
develop a climate and health vulnerability 
assessment. 
• Support community based organizations 
to inform communities about climate 
and health risks and provide input on 
community priorities to local government 
agencies. representative of the vulnerable 
populations identiﬁed in the CHEVA to 
identify the appropriate approach to 
engaging with that community.
o  Compensate CBO partners, provide 
meals, childcare, and compensate 
community members for their time  
and contributions.
• Collaborate with LHD partners to include 
climate change impacts into existing 
planning processes.
Key Action Steps:
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
183
183
6.6 Clinical Services and Health Care Systems
Local health departments (LHDs) connect people to clinical services and educate and coordinate with health care 
providers and health care systems. Many LHDs also provide clinical services and/or are organizationally located 
in larger agencies that operate health care systems. 
LHDs are uniquely positioned to assess and address the needs of the most vulnerable individuals, 
inform clinicians about climate impacts on health and their roles in addressing climate and health, 
and support the development of climate-resilient health care systems.
• 
The signiﬁcant impacts of climate change on health affect the need for clinical care and case 
management, particularly in people with chronic illness, children and the elderly, some workers, 
and those impacted by climate disasters.
• 
Health care sector is a signiﬁcant contributor to greenhouse gas emissions.
• 
Extreme weather events can seriously disrupt hospitals and health care.
• 
Health care providers and health care systems can:
 
Inform patients about climate risks, incorporate knowledge of climate impacts into 
patient care, and make referrals for climate-related services.
 
Integrate climate change into non-proﬁt hospital system Community Health Needs 
Assessments.
 
Serve as “climate and health champions” to educate community residents and decision 
makers about climate health impacts and support climate actions with health beneﬁts.
 
Work to reduce the carbon footprint of health care facilities.
 
Help to ensure that people have access to health care services and that health care 
systems can function during and after climate disasters, including through participation 
in Medical Reserve Corps programs.
Key Messages
Stranded Ambulance in New York After Hurricane Sandy. 
Alex Perkins (CC by 2.0)
Gunderson Health System: Gundersen Lutheran Medical Center
http://www.gundersenhealth.org/locations/la-crosse-campus/hospital/ 
184
184
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Support Integration of Climate Change into Patient Care 
Health care providers have an important role in educating patients about the health impacts of climate change, 
and steps they can take to protect their health and ﬁght climate change (See Section 4—Health Impacts, and  
A Physician’s Guide on Climate Change, Health and Equity).1 LHDs can inform health care providers about 
climate risks and health impacts, provide materials for distribution to patients and other caregivers, and facilitate 
provider referrals to services that protect patients from climate-related illnesses. 
Health care providers can help patients reduce the health risks of climate change: 
• 
Integrate information about speciﬁc relevant climate risks into patient education and care management 
plans, for example: (See Appendix 5—Clinical Considerations) 
 
Inform heat-sensitive patients (e.g. people with diabetes or those taking some psychotropic 
medications) of their increased risks of heat illness and how to prevent it, such as having working 
air conditioning in the home, knowing how to get to a cooling center, and staying hydrated.
 
Warn parents never to leave children in a car, even if the windows are ‘cracked’ or open, as 
temperatures quickly rise to unsafe levels in warm weather. 
 
Advise patients with respiratory and heart disease to check the Air Quality Index for unsafe 
ozone and particulate levels, especially during heat waves, and to adjust outdoor activity on bad 
air days.2  
 
Make sure patients—especially women of reproductive age—understand how to protect against 
mosquito-borne illnesses using insect repellent, clothing, and home window screens.
• 
Provide information on family emergency plans and local shelters and cooling centers.
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
185
185
• 
Connect low income patients to resources for ﬁnancial and other support such as the Low Income Home 
Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP), home weatherization, housing code enforcement, tree planting, 
and WIC and SNAP supplemental food programs. 4 
• 
Provide climate and health information in factsheets and posters for patient waiting rooms.3
• 
Ensure plans and processes are in place for appropriate immunizations for evacuees and displaced 
persons following a climate-related disaster (See Section 6.5—Preparedness).
Climate and Health Champions
Health care providers are seeing the impacts of climate change on patients now. They can be powerful voices in 
helping the public and policy makers understand that climate change is a health issue and that climate action is 
urgent.5,6 LHDs can prepare these community leaders to serve as climate and health champions.
• 
Present on climate change and health at local hospital and clinic grand rounds and brown bag lunches; 
include exercises to build skills of providers to talk about climate change and reach out to local decision 
makers.
• 
Ask if you can have a table on climate change and health at a health system-sponsored community  
health fair.
• 
Help providers and health systems leaders to support local climate and health actions, e.g. inform elected 
ofﬁcials about the beneﬁts of bike and walk infrastructure  for children’s health or the need for reducing 
diesel pollution to reduce asthma.
 
Coauthor op-eds or letters to the editor, or connect them to opportunities to share their 
experiences with climate related illness on local radio or television or following extreme events.
 
See Climate Advocacy Resources for Health Professionals.7  
Integrating Climate Change into Community Health Needs Assessments and 
Community Beneﬁt Strategies
Community Health Needs Assessments
Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, all non-proﬁt health systems are required to complete 
a Community Health Needs Assessments (CHNA) regularly.8 CHNAs address ﬁnancial and other barriers to 
health care, as well as “social, behavioral and environmental factors that address health in the community,” and 
integrate climate change into planning for programs to address health needs. LHDs can encourage integration 
of climate change into CHNAs through providing information on the nature of regional climate projections and 
related health risks. LHDs can recommend indicators and provide data on climate vulnerability, climate risks, and 
community resilience (See Section 7.1—Surveillance). Additional data sources include: Community Commons 
and CDC’s Climate and Health Data and Tools.9,10   
Community Beneﬁt Strategies
Informed by CHNA, community beneﬁts programs address community health priorities, many of which are 
exacerbated by climate change. Community beneﬁt strategies with climate and health beneﬁts provide win-wins 
and the greatest value. For example:
186
186
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
• 
Creating walking and biking paths to encourage recreational physical activity and active transportation 
helps reduce cardiovascular disease and obesity while lowering air pollution and fossil fuel use. 
• 
Investing in energy efﬁciency retroﬁts for low-income homes can improve ﬁnancial and energy security 
while improving indoor air quality and reducing exposure to asthma triggers. 
See Section 5—Health Beneﬁts and Health Care Without Harm’s Leveraging Hospital Community Beneﬁt 
Activities to Address Climate Change and Environmental Risks.11  
Climate-Resilient Health Care
“Our hospitals and clinics need to be resilient and fortiﬁed so they can anchor the community 
response during extreme weather events. They need to be the last buildings standing in a hurricane 
rather than one of the ﬁrst ones to go down.”  
Gary Cohen, Health Care Without Harm 
 
 
Recent hurricanes demonstrated the impacts of extreme weather events on health care systems. 
• 
An estimated 40%–70% of those affected by Hurricane Katrina had a chronic illness, for which 
medication management was a key challenge during the days and weeks after the event.12 
• 
At least two major New York City hospitals had to be evacuated during Super Storm Sandy, and the 
storm caused loss of signiﬁcant bed capacity for months. A year after Sandy, several hospitals were still 
struggling to return to normal.13 
• 
Three days after Hurricane Maria, only 3 hospitals on Puerto Rico were functioning, and 40% were still 
running on generator power two months after the storm.14 
 
Two months after the storm, almost half the island’s population lived in health professional 
shortage areas, and less than 2% of the need for physicians was being met.15   
As the frequency and severity of extreme events increases, it is imperative to increase health care system 
resilience to allow uninterrupted provision of emergency medical services following extreme events and mental 
health services16 LHDs can encourage and assist health care providers and health care systems to proactively 
collaborate to participate in Medical Reserve Corps, assess regional health system vulnerability and resilience, 
and develop plans for assuring continued access to health services in the era of climate change. 
Medical Reserve Corps 
The Medical Reserve Corps (MRC) Program coordinates the skills of practicing and retired 
health professionals to deliver services during a crisis, assist emergency response teams with 
patients, provide care directly to those with less serious injuries and other health-related 
issues, and assist with other ongoing public health needs. LHDs can support development 
and maintenance of an MRC including training on emergency response protocols.17 
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
187
187
HEALTH CARE RESILIENCE: Following is a checklist for health care facilities resilience.18
 Where are health care services facilities located, and are they at risk of storm surge? Flooding? Wildﬁre?
 Can new facilities be sited out of risk zones and still accessible to community?
 Does the facility emergency response plan take climate change into account?
 Are all staff trained on the emergency response plan?
 Will transportation access be impacted by climate-related weather event?19
 Is there an evacuation plan and has it been exercised?
 Are there institutional agreements and triage protocols in place for patient transfer during extreme events?
 
Could critical infrastructure (e.g. generators, electro-mechanical systems) in facilities at risk of ﬂooding  
       be relocated from lower ﬂoors and basements?
 
Is it possible to implement on-site renewable electricity generation or co-production of heat and energy  
       to maintain power in the event of a grid outage?
 Can trees and other green space be expanded to reduce ﬂood risk? 
 Invest in LHD clinics and urge other facilities to invest in hazard management to prepare for extreme  
 
       weather.
For More Information 
• 
DHHS’s Primary Protection: Enhancing Health Care Resilience for a Changing Climate20  
• 
WHO Operational Framework for Building Climate Resilient Health Systems21   
Greening Health Care
In 2013, the U.S. health care sector was responsible for 10% of national greenhouse gas emissions and 9% of 
national criteria air pollutants emissions, primarily from hospitals.22 Health care facilities can implement many 
practices to reduce their carbon footprint while producing immediate short-term and long-term health beneﬁts. 
LHDs can encourage local hospitals and health care systems to “go green,” and connect them with resources to 
do so. See the Healthcare Climate Council.23 Following is a summary greening ideas LHDs can provide to health 
facilities to promote their sustainability and resilience. 
188
188
CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH, AND EQUITY: A GUIDE FOR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Energy
Health care operations managers can reduce carbon pollution from dirty fossil fuel-based energy through energy 
efﬁciency and decarbonization of facility energy supply.
“A 30% cut in healthcare electricity’s carbon pollution by 2030 would reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions, preventing an estimated 4,130 premature deaths, 85,000 asthma attacks, 4 million 
respiratory symptom events, and 3,750 visit incidents and save about $1.2 billion in medical costs.”
Health Care Without Harm24 
Energy Efﬁciency25 
• 
Perform an energy audit and annually measure building energy use to prioritize energy use reduction efforts. 
• 
Establish system-wide energy conservation programs and efﬁciency improvements, for example in 
mechanical systems; lighting upgrades; improved insulation; heating, cooling, and ventilation upgrades; 
and equipment purchases. 
• 
Engage staff on energy conservation and efﬁciency practices, including custodial services staff.
Renewable Energy26 
• 
Consider installation of rooftop solar on facility roofs or parking lots, and/or procurement of energy from 
renewable energy suppliers. 
• 
Use Power Purchasing agreements and purchase of Renewable Energy Certiﬁcates to increase utility 
production of clean energy.
Transportation27 
• 
Provide ﬁnancial and other incentives to employees and clients to walk, bike, and take public transit, for 
example charging for daily parking, subsidized bike and transit commutes, bicycle parking and shower 
facilities on site, personalized commute planning, shuttle services.
 
Seattle Children’s Hospital reduced workforce drive-alone commute trips from 73% in 1995 to 
38% in 2015.28  
• 
Invest in electric vehicles for ﬂeet upgrades. 
• 
Collaborate with local transportation agencies to improve bike and pedestrian infrastructure and transit 
operations.29 
Waste Reduction30 
• 
Annually conduct a waste stream audit identifying the types and amounts of waste at your facility.
• 
Create a “Waste Management Plan” and implementation strategies to prioritize waste reduction, reuse, 
recycling, and composting.
• 
Work with suppliers to purchase ofﬁce supplies and medical supplies that have a reduced environmental 
impact.
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
189
189
• 
Review procurement policies and support local, sustainable materials and foods.
• 
When applicable, dispose of waste locally to reduce transport related emissions.
Food 
• 
Establish local and sustainable food purchasing policies for facility cafeterias, meeting and event catering, 
and on-site food retail.31  
• 
Implement policies and programs to reduce purchase and consumption of meat, for example “Meatless 
Mondays.”32 
• 
Promote healthy and sustainable food and beverage consumption through patient, staff, and visitor 
education.33 
• 
Reduce food waste, through changes in meal selection processes, composting of food waste, and edible 
food recovery programs in partnership with local food insecurity organizations.34,35    
• 
LHDs can encourage and facilitate collaboration of health systems with agricultural agencies, parks, 
planning, and local farmers and job training programs to:
 
Create on-site (including rooftop) community gardens and/or support gardens in other nearby 
locations.36 
 
Contract with local growers for food procurement.37 
 
Support and provide opportunities for training food service workers.38 
For More Information 
• 
Green Guide for Health Care39
• 
Environmental Impacts of the U.S. Health Care System and Effects on Public Health40 
• 
Health in the Green Economy: Co-beneﬁts to Health of Climate Change Mitigation, Health Care Facilities41 
• 
Sustainable Healthcare Facilities42  
• 
Greening Health Care: How Hospitals Can Heal the Planet43 
• 
PolicyLink Local Food Procurement Guide44 
