 
 
 
WILDFIRE SMOKE FACTSHEET 
Reduce Your Smoke Exposure 
When wildfres create smoky conditions, there are things you can do, indoors and out, to reduce your 
exposure to smoke. Reducing exposure is important for everyone’s health — especially children, 
older adults, and people with heart or lung disease. 
Reduce smoke exposure indoors 
•
Stay inside with the doors and windows
closed. Whether you have a central air
conditioning system or a room unit, use high
efciency flters to capture fne particles
from smoke. Ask an air conditioning
professional what type of high efciency
flter your air conditioner can accept.
•
Seek shelter elsewhere if you do not have
an air conditioner and it is too warm to stay
inside with the windows closed.
•
Do not add to indoor air pollution. Do not
burn candles or use gas, propane, wood-
burning stoves, freplaces, or aerosol sprays.
Do not fry or broil meat, smoke tobacco
products, or vacuum. All of these can
increase air pollution indoors.
•
Use a portable air cleaner to reduce indoor
air pollution. Make sure it is sized for the
room and that it does not make ozone,
which is a harmful air pollutant. Portable air
cleaners can be used along with efcient
central air systems with efcient flters to
maximize the reduction of indoor particles.
•
Create a “clean room” in your home. Choose
a room with no freplace and as few windows
and doors as possible, such as a bedroom.
Use a portable air cleaner in the room.
•
Have a supply of N95 respirators and learn
how to use them. They are sold at many
home improvement stores and online.
•
Long-term smoke events usually have
periods when the air is better. When air
quality improves, even temporarily, air out
your home to reduce indoor air pollution.
Use a portable air cleaner to reduce 
indoor air pollution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
Reduce smoke exposure outdoors 
•
Take it easier during smoky times to
reduce how much smoke you inhale. If
it looks or smells smoky outside, avoid
strenuous activities such as mowing the
lawn or going for a run.
•
Know your air quality. Smoke levels can
change a lot during the day, so wait until
air quality is better before you are active
outdoors. Check your state or local air
quality agency’s website or airnow.gov for
air quality forecasts and current air quality
conditions. On AirNow, you can also sign up
to get email notifcations, download an air
quality app, or check current fre conditions.
In addition, some communities have visual
range programs where you can assess smoke
conditions by how far you can see.
•
Have enough food and medication on
hand to last several days so you don’t have to
go out for supplies. If you must go out, avoid
the smokiest times of day.
•
Reduce smoke in your vehicle by closing
the windows and vents and running the air
conditioner in recirculate
mode. Slow down when
you drive in smoky
conditions.
•
Do not rely on dust masks or bandanas for
protection from smoke. If you must be out
in smoky conditions, an N95 respirator can
protect you, if it fts snugly to your face and is
worn properly.
•
Have a plan to evacuate. Know how you
will get alerts and health warnings, including
air quality reports and public service
announcements (PSAs). Public advisories
can provide important information such as
changing smoke conditions and evacuation
notices. Know your evacuation routes,
organize your important items ahead of
time, and know where to go in case you have
to evacuate.
Reduce your risk of health problems: 
•
Have enough medication and food (enough for more than 5 days) on hand.
•
Follow your health care provider’s advice about what to do if you have heart or lung disease.
•
If you have asthma, follow your asthma management plan.
•
If you feel sick, reduce your exposure to smoke and contact your health care provider.
•
Pay attention to public service announcements, health advisories, and air quality advisories.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency · EPA- 452/F-18-003
