Skip directly to site contentSkip directly to page options
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People
Climate and Health
CDC
Climate and Health
Climate Effects on Health
Regional Health Effects
Regional Health Effects - Hawaii and U.S.-Affiliated Pacific Islands
Print
Health Impacts
The U.S. State of Hawaii and U.S.- Affiliated Pacific Islands
Extreme Events
The rate of global average sea level rise has accelerated and has become very damaging in the region. Impacts include coastal erosion, episodic flooding, permanent inundation, heightened exposure to marine hazards, and saltwater intrusion to surface water and groundwater systems. Already apparent on many shorelines, these problems endanger human communities by negatively impacting basic societal needs, such as food and freshwater availability, housing, energy and transportation infrastructure, and access to government services. Climate-related migration in U.S.-affiliated islands also directly impacts health.

Vector-Borne Diseases
An increase in the incidence of vector-borne diseases such as malaria and dengue in the Pacific Islands has been linked to climate variability and is expected to increase further as a result of climate change. For example, in late 2013 and early 2014, Fiji experienced the largest outbreak of dengue in its history, with approximately 28,000 reported cases.

Water-Related Illness
Dependable and safe water supplies for Pacific island communities and ecosystems are threatened by rising temperatures, changing rainfall patterns, sea level rise, and increased risk of extreme drought and flooding. Islands are already experiencing saltwater contamination due to sea level rise, which is expected to catastrophically impact food and water security, especially on low-lying atolls. Additionally, chronic water shortages are possible as rainfall decreases and both evaporation and the water requirements of a growing human population increase.

Food Safety, Nutrition and Distribution
Away from urban areas, many island communities rely on food gathered from the ocean and land. Rising sea surface temperatures are shifting the location of fisheries. Ocean warming and acidification, coupled with damaging watershed and reef practices, converge on island shores to increasingly limit the food resources that can be gathered from the sea. In Hawaii, climate change impacts, such as reduced streamflow, sea level rise, saltwater intrusion, and long periods of drought, threaten the ongoing cultivation of taro and other traditional crops. These kinds of climate impacts lead to an increased dependence on imported food that is of little nutritional value. This is a public health concern for Hawaii and the U.S.-Affiliated Pacific Islands, as Indigenous Pacific Islanders have the highest rates of obesity and chronic diseases, such as diabetes, in the region.

Mental Health and Well-Being
Sea level rise imperils Indigenous communities of the Pacific. The sea that surrounds Pacific island communities continues to rise at a rate faster than the global average, with documented impacts on agriculture, coastal infrastructure, food security, livelihoods, and disaster management in the Republic of Palau and the Republic of the Marshall Islands. In Hawaii, sea level rise impacts on traditional and customary practices (including fishpond maintenance, cultivation of salt, and gathering from the nearshore fisheries) have been observed. Detachment from traditional lands has a negative effect on the spiritual and mental health of the people.

Populations of Concern
Indigenous communities of the Pacific have an inseparable connection to and derive their sense of identity from the lands, territories, and resources of their islands. Climate change threatens this familial relationship with ancestral resources and is disrupting the continuity that is required for the health and well-being of these communities (this experience is common to many tribal and Indigenous communities across the United States). Women have also been identified as a more vulnerable population to regional climate risks due to the role they have in terms of economic activities, safety, health, and their livelihoods.

CDC-Funded Jurisdictions
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Commonwealth Healthcare Corporationexternal icon
To bolster capacity to address the public health threats associated with climate change, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI) Commonwealth Health Care Corporation planned and executed a climate change training for staff throughout the agency. This helped to build knowledge and expertise locally. In addition, the project team also developed a CNMI-specific health impact scoping report to assess the local risk of various impacts. Throughout the project, the team also identified and built relationships with key partners outside of public health, including other governmental agencies, who can provide expertise and input on climate and health work across CNMI.

The Federated States of Micronesia, Department of Health and Social Affairsexternal icon
This project aimed to assist the people of the low-lying islands in the states of Chuuk and Pohnpei in the Federated States of Micronesia with knowledge, skills and techniques to maintain a healthy island diet in a changing environment. The project consisted of educational workshops and hands-on exercises. In this collaborative project, local agricultural and diet-related knowledge and practices were paired with outside technical assistance (geographic information system training provided by CDC and ASTHO) to empower the communities on the low-lying islands to adapt to climate change with regard to food security and water management.

Download the factsheet for Preparing for the Health Impacts of Climate Change in Hawaii and U.S.-Affiliated Pacific Islands pdf icon[PDF – 1 MB | Print Only]. For more on the effects of climate change on health in different regions, see “Preparing for the Regional Health Impacts of Climate Change in the United States.” pdf icon[PDF – 2.78 MB]

Relevant Links
EPA state-level climate and health impacts mapexternal icon
Fourth National Climate Assessment Chapter: Hawaii and U.S.-Affiliated Pacific Islandsexternal icon
NOAA RISA: Pacific RISAexternal icon
NOAA State Climate Summary: Hawaiiexternal icon, Pacific Islands pdf icon[PDF – 8.87 MB]external icon
NIHHIS/NOAA 2020 Urban Heat Island Community Science Campaign Citiesexternal icon: Honolulu, HI
Page last reviewed: March 2, 2021
Content source: National Center for Environmental Health
Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Syndicate
home
Climate and Health
Climate Effects on Health
plus icon
Air Pollution
Allergens
plus icon
Wildfires
Temperature Extremes
Precipitation Extremes
Diseases Carried by Vectors
Food and Waterborne Diarrheal Disease
Food Security
Mental Health and Stress-Related Disorders
Regional Health Effects
plus icon
Alaska
Hawaii and U.S.-Affiliated Pacific Islands
Midwest
Northeast
Northern Great Plains
Northwest
Southeast
Southern Great Plains
Southwest
U.S. Caribbean
Climate-Ready States & Cities Initiative
plus icon
BRACE Framework
What's New
Resources
plus icon
Core Functions
Publications
Policy
Partners
About CDC
Contact Us
800-232-4636
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
LinkedIn
Youtube
Pinterest
Snapchat
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
Accessibility
External Links
Privacy
Policies
No Fear Act
FOIA
Nondiscrimination
OIG
Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
USA.gov