Skip to main content
U.S. flag
An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know
Search
Search EPA.gov

Environmental Topics
Laws & Regulations
Report a Violation
About EPA
Innovation
CONTACT US
Region 9: ASPIRE-Health: Does Air Cleaner Use During Wildfires Have a Measurable Impact on Health and Indoor Air Quality?
2020 Regional-State-Tribal Innovation Projects

Many areas in the western US are experiencing large wildfires, exposing millions to unhealthy and hazardous air quality every year, often for days, weeks, and months on end. Due to a changing climate, longer fire seasons, and a buildup of dry fuels, these extreme events are anticipated to persist in the coming years, even with aggressive measures to manage forests. Public health officials recommend that people stay indoors and use air filtration to reduce exposure to smoke. However, few studies have examined the use of different types of portable air cleaners to improve indoor air quality, the barriers to their use, and whether their use affects the health outcomes of building inhabitants during wildfire smoke events.

ASPIRE-Health: Hoopa, CA
Wildfire smoke may disproportionately impact individuals living in Tribal areas, socioeconomically disadvantaged communities, and other communities with environmental justice (EJ) concerns. The Hoopa Valley Tribe, located in Northern California, has frequently experienced smoke episodes, with measured outdoor concentrations exceeding the hazardous category of the Air Quality Index. This smoke also infiltrates indoors leading to unhealthy air pollutant concentrations that have been measured inside several buildings. The Hoopa Valley Tribe has been very proactive in protecting the health of residents from wildfire smoke, including providing air cleaners to residents. The tribe has also been an active and valued partner with the US EPA on wildfire smoke research.

Learn more about this research: Wildfire Study to Advance Science Partnerships for Indoor Reductions of Smoke Exposures

The ASPIRE-Health pilot study took place in homes on the Hoopa Valley Tribal Reservation during the fall of 2021 and the winter of 2022. Researchers assessed indoor air quality and health measures during four study phases: (1) Baseline conditions in the home, (2) Running a low-cost do-it-yourself (DIY) air cleaner in the home, (3) Running a commercial air cleaner in the home, and (4) Installing a low-cost indoor air sensor with a visual display of air quality in the home to evaluate how sensor use impacts study participants’ use of the air cleaners. They also assessed participants’ use and perceptions of the DIY and commercial air cleaners. The data collection phase of this study has concluded, and data analysis has begun.

Partners: Hoopa Valley Tribal Environmental Protection Agency; Humboldt State University; California EPA (ARB and OEHHA); Lawrence Berkeley National Lab; CA Department of Public Health

ASPIRE-Health: Tulare County, CA
An expanded study will take place in the summer and fall of 2023 in Tulare County, CA. This study will build on the lessons learned from the Hoopa, CA pilot studies and will include a larger number of homes and study participants. The goal of this study is to evaluate the impact of wildfire smoke on indoor air quality and health measures under one of three scenarios: (1) Baseline conditions at the home (no intervention), (2) Running a low-cost do-it-yourself (DIY) air cleaner in the home, and (3) Running a commercial air cleaner in the home. Researchers will also assess participants’ use and perceptions of the DIY and commercial air cleaners.

Partners: Central California Environmental Justice Network (CCEJN); UL-Chemical Insights Research Division; Duke University

EPA Innovation Home
Challenges and Prizes
Pathfinder Innovation Projects
2023 Awardees
2021 Awardees
2020 Awardees
2019 Awardees
Contact Us to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.
LAST UPDATED ON AUGUST 29, 2023
United States Environmental Protection Agency
Discover.
Accessibility Statement
Budget & Performance
Contracting
EPA www Web Snapshot
Grants
No FEAR Act Data
Plain Writing
Privacy
Privacy and Security Notice
Connect.
Data
Inspector General
Jobs
Newsroom
Regulations.gov
Subscribe
USA.gov
White House
Ask.
Contact EPA
EPA Disclaimers
Hotlines
FOIA Requests
Frequent Questions
Follow.