[Skip to Navigation]
Our website uses cookies to enhance your experience. By continuing to use our site, or clicking "Continue," you are agreeing to our Cookie Policy | Continue
JAMA Network HomeJAMA
Enter Search Term
 
Featured Clinical Reviews
Screening for Atrial Fibrillation: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement
JAMA Recommendation Statement January 25, 2022
Evaluating the Patient With a Pulmonary Nodule: A Review
JAMA Review January 18, 2022
More
This Issue 
Views 6,135  Citations 0  
26
Download PDF
Cite This
Permissions
Comment
Viewpoint
February 10, 2022
Respiratory Protection for the Nation
A Report From the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
Jonathan M. Samet, MD, MS1; Stephanie M. Holm, MD, PhD, MPH2; Sundaresan Jayaraman, PhD3
Author Affiliations Article Information
JAMA. 2022;327(11):1023-1024. doi:10.1001/jama.2022.1318
Under standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), approved devices for respiratory protection are required for many workers who may encounter inhalation hazards.1,2 For workers covered by OSHA, the mandated respiratory protection programs (RPPs) use respirators certified by the National Personal Protective Technology Laboratory (NPPTL) of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH).3,4 For the many other workers not covered in mandated RPPs and for the public, there are no analogous programs, but the need for them is evident.5,6

Two years into the COVID-19 pandemic and with wildfire smoke frequently permeating the air at high concentrations in much of the western US, the general public and many US workers have questions, such as, Do I need to wear a mask or respirator and which one? How do I obtain the right device for my situation and for my family? Having the right answers to these questions and the right devices available can prevent illness and reduce morbidity and mortality. However, these questions cannot be answered satisfactorily at present, particularly for those groups that have been affected inequitably by the pandemic.

To address the nation’s unmet needs for respiratory protection, a consensus committee of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (National Academies) was charged with developing frameworks addressing the population at large and workers not covered by RPPs.7 For these populations (which are diverse in demographic characteristics, vulnerability, and susceptibility), the agents of concern and the circumstances of exposure are broad, encompassing both acute emergency scenarios and sometime sustained exposures.

The committee found a useful, albeit imperfect, starting point in OSHA’s RPPs. In a standards-driven approach referred to as conformity assessment (a quality assurance process demonstrating that devices meet preestablished requirements such as defined levels of filtration efficiency) and overseen by the NPPTL, respirators are tested to ensure that standards are met.4 Employers are required to provide appropriate NIOSH-approved respirators and ensure they are fitted correctly to each worker. For workers outside of a formal RPP and for the public, the US has no coordinated system for supporting the development of standards, testing devices to ensure standards are met, providing appropriate devices, and creating coordinated guidance for respiratory protection. These gaps limit timely access to, and effective use of, appropriate devices. The respiratory protection needs of many workers and the public are not being met.

To contend with complexities of existing terminology, the committee used the term respiratory protective device (RPD) as an umbrella label for the various personal devices that provide protection against inhalation hazards (defined as gases, vapors, or particles, including airborne transmissible microorganisms that can be breathed in and potentially cause harm) when used effectively. This function-based definition acknowledges that each device may offer personal protection, source control (eg, for infectious aerosols generated by people), or both at various levels. Although some devices meet specified design and performance criteria, others do not.

A Systems-Based Framework Approach

The committee used a systems approach to develop a general framework applicable to both workers and the public (eFigure in the Supplement). Foundational principles guiding the development of the framework were the necessity of primary prevention of exposure to inhalation hazards for all; provision of respiratory protection as part of a multifaceted strategy because RPDs can reduce but not eliminate risk; the necessity of preparedness to meet needs when they arise and prevent failures; and assurance of equity in access to respiratory protection. The committee acknowledged the heterogeneity of the populations needing effective respiratory protection across multiple dimensions, including age, racial and ethnic background, variation in facial profiles, underlying health and disease status, presence of a disability, level of education, income, language, and geographic location.

The committee’s approach incorporated elements necessary to ensure effective respiratory protection (eg, hazard identification and assessment, product design and manufacturing, device selection and use). Central to this approach was the need for an accountable entity to coordinate efforts and incorporate multiple feedback loops across the milieu of stakeholders to ensure ongoing improvement in the diverse functions encompassed by the framework (eFigure in the Supplement). The resulting framework incorporates 7 core functions (with specified subfunctions), which may be ongoing or triggered by the occurrence of a specific hazard. Although the functions are numbered, their sequencing will be determined by the specific exposure situation, with some occurring simultaneously.

Applying the Framework to Workers

Recognizing its current authority in the realm of worker health and safety, the committee identified OSHA as the appropriate coordinating entity for the development, functioning, oversight, evaluation, and continuous improvement of its proposed framework for workers not currently covered by RPPs. To cover all workers, the Occupational Safety and Health Act must be revised both to eliminate gaps in OSHA’s coverage and to resolve complications from coverages by other governmental agencies. The committee also recommended that OSHA reconsider its outdated statutory interpretations regarding definitions of “employers” and “employees” and take immediate action to develop or revise workplace exposure standards for inhalation hazards for which comprehensive standards are outdated or lacking (eg, airborne particulate matter, infectious agents). Such standards would trigger RPP requirements for employers and the use of respirators, the only type of RPD appropriate for workers.

To address the greatly expanded coverage of workers, the committee called for increasing the capacity of the NPPTL and the research and surveillance activities of NIOSH. The expansion of coverage will require defining communication channels to reach a broader group of employers and workers with appropriate guidance and training materials. Achieving equity will be critical despite complications posed by the diversity of worker groups and the influences of different administrative structures and power dynamics, local contexts, and psychosocial and political factors. There is an additional challenge of ensuring availability of respirators, one that was not adequately met at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic in the US. To address the supply chain problem, OSHA and NIOSH should undertake a detailed evaluation to understand and predict the potential scope of the increased need for respiratory protection to inform stockpiling and distribution guidelines regarding RPDs.

Applying the Framework to the Public

In contrast to the situation for occupational inhalation hazards, there is no corollary structure in the context of public protection, and there are gaps in critical authorities, particularly related to conformity assessment and approval of RPDs (NIOSH certifies respirators used in OSHA-mandated RPPs). For example, there are no certified respirators for children; thus, during the COVID-19 pandemic many parents have turned to products produced outside the US, some of which are counterfeit.8 Given the complex landscape of stakeholders and authorities (including federal, state, and local agencies; professional and research organizations; manufacturers; and the public), there is a critical need for a coordinating entity with the necessary leadership, resources, and oversight to integrate the efforts of all parties engaged in the processes that culminate with making RPDs available to users. To facilitate such coordination, the committee favors a hub-and-spoke model whereby functions can be distributed across the multiple entities fulfilling the functions of the framework (the spokes), but in which the coordinating entity serves as a central hub and functions as a unified and authoritative source of information and effective oversight in the development, approval, and use of RPDs.

The committee recommended that Congress expeditiously establish an empowered coordinating entity within the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). As the first step, the committee recommended that the US Secretary of HHS immediately establish an interim office to take on priority near-term tasks of the coordinating entity and that the White House establish an interagency task force focused on respiratory protection for the public to ensure coordination across stakeholder agencies.

At present, a patchwork of agencies across federal, state, and local governments addresses components of various functions in the committee’s framework. To implement the committee’s framework (eFigure in the Supplement), the coordinating entity will need to assign and organize roles and responsibilities of federal and other agencies and entities through a structured process that matches their capabilities to the committee’s framework functions. Where gaps in authorities are identified, Congress should address them to ensure the necessary oversight for each of the framework functions. This process should build on the committee’s work to identify the necessary capabilities and oversight authorities of governmental and nongovernmental entities for each function and to consider potential stakeholders to fill current gaps as the framework is built. Continued consideration of equity must be foundational in the ongoing development of this detailed structure.

Conclusions

For decades, the nation’s systems for ensuring respiratory protection have been focused on a small subset of the US population: workers who are exposed to inhalation hazards as an intrinsic consequence of their jobs and for whom RPPs are required by law. However, the threats from inhalation hazards extend far beyond this group of workers and potentially affect all children and adults in the US. Although it is impossible to know what is coming next, the nation must be better prepared for future airborne threats.

Back to topArticle Information
Corresponding Author: Jonathan M. Samet, MD, MS, Office of the Dean, Department of Epidemiology, Colorado School of Public Health, 13001 E 17th Pl, Aurora, CO 80045 (jon.samet@cuanschutz.edu).

Published Online: February 10, 2022. doi:10.1001/jama.2022.1318

Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.

Funding/Support: The report described in this Viewpoint was sponsored by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, the US Environmental Protection Agency, the US Department of State, and the CDC Foundation.

Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funders had no role in the preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit the manuscript for publication.

Additional Contributions: We acknowledge the contributions of the members of the Committee on Respiratory Protection for the Public and Workers without Respiratory Protection Programs at their Workplaces that authored the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine report; consultants to the committee; and the considerable support of the National Academies’ staff in supporting the report’s production.

References
1.
United States Code: Occupational Safety and Health, 29 USC §651-678 (1976).
2.
Respiratory protective devices used in healthcare. Fed Regist. 2014;79(50):14515-14517. Accessed January 14, 2022. https://www.govinfo.gov/app/details/FR-2014-03-14/2014-05611
3.
Respiratory Protection. 29 CFR §1910.134(c)(1) (1998).
4.
NIOSH. National framework for personal protective equipment conformity assessment-infrastructure. D’Alessandro M, ed. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health; 2017. DHHS (NIOSH) Publication 2018-102.
5.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Current Issues in the Assessment of Respiratory Protective Devices for Occupational and Non-occupational Uses: Proceedings of a Workshop. National Academies Press; 2021.
6.
Holm  SM﻿, Miller  MD﻿, Balmes  JR﻿.  Health effects of wildfire smoke in children and public health tools: a narrative review. ﻿  J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol. 2021;31(1):1-20. doi:10.1038/s41370-020-00267-4PubMedGoogle ScholarCrossref
7.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Frameworks for Protecting Workers and the Public From Inhalation Hazards. National Academies Press; 2022.
8.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Types of masks and respirators. Accessed January 14, 2022. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/types-of-masks.html
Comment
See More About
Occupational Health Pulmonary Medicine Environmental Health Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion
Artificial Intelligence Resource Center


Trending
News has multimedia
How Wildfire Smoke Harms Health
September 21, 2023
Research
Canadian Wildfire Smoke and Asthma ED Visits in New York City
September 21, 2023
News
Most People Experiencing More Days of Heavy Wildfire Smoke
June 28, 2023
Select Your Interests
JOB LISTINGS ON JAMA CAREER CENTER®
Physician - OB/GYN
Atascocita, Texas
Physician - OB/GYN
Bay Area Bld. B, Texas
Physician- OB/GYN Generalist- Monroe Medical Group/Monroe Hospital
Monroe, WI
Seeking OB/GYN - Shawnee, OK, SSM Health - Supportive Colleagues & Aggressive Compensation!
Shawnee, OK
Chairperson, Department of OB/GYN
Bridgeport, Connecticut
See more at JAMA Career Center
Others Also Liked
A Survey of Private Sector Respirator Use in the United States: An Overview of Findings
Brent Doney et al., Sensor Letters, 2005
Conducting an evaluation of CBRN canister protection capabilities against emerging chemical and radiological hazards
Lee A. Greenawald et al., Sensor Letters, 2020
OSHA 1971: Bringing Government to Protect the Lives of Industrial and Farm Workers
Steven Wodka, Am J Public Health, 2018
Powered by
Trending
How Wildfire Smoke Harms Health
JAMA News September 21, 2023
Canadian Wildfire Smoke and Asthma ED Visits in New York City
JAMA Research September 21, 2023
Wildfire Exposure During Lung Cancer Surgery Recovery
JAMA Oncology Research July 27, 2023
JAMA
CONTENT
Home New Online Current Issue
PODCASTS
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Q&A Clinical Reviews Editors' Summary Medical News Author Interviews JAMAevidence: JAMA Guide to Statistics and Methods JAMAevidence: The Rational Clinical Examination JAMAevidence: Users' Guides to the Medical Literature
JOURNAL INFORMATION
For Authors JAMA Editors Editors & Publishers RSS Contact Us
JN Learning / CME Store Apps Jobs Institutions Reprints & Permissions
Journal Cover
Subscribe
Go
JAMA Network
PUBLICATIONS
JAMA JAMA Network Open JAMA Cardiology JAMA Dermatology JAMA Health Forum JAMA Internal Medicine JAMA Neurology JAMA Oncology JAMA Ophthalmology JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery JAMA Pediatrics JAMA Psychiatry JAMA Surgery Archives of Neurology & Psychiatry (1919-1959)
SITES
Art and Images in Psychiatry Artificial Intelligence (AI) Resource Center Best of the JAMA Network Caring for the Critically Ill Patient Clinical Crosswords from JAMA Coronavirus Resource Center Evidence-Based Medicine: An Oral History Fishbein Fellowship Genomics and Precision Health Hypertension JAMA Forum Archive JAMA Network Audio JAMA Network Video JAMA Network Conferences JAMA Surgery Guide to Statistics and Methods Medical News Mpox (Monkeypox) Research Ethics Topics and Collections Visual Abstracts War and Health Women's Health
FEATURED ARTICLES
Antiretroviral Drugs for HIV Treatment and Prevention in Adults - 2022 IAS-USA Recommendations CONSERVE 2021 Guidelines for Reporting Trials Modified for the COVID-19 Pandemic Creation and Adoption of Large Language Models in Medicine Global Burden of Cancer, 2010-2019 Global Burden of Long COVID Global Burden of Melanoma Global Burden of Skin Diseases, 1990-2017 Global Disparities in Parkinson Disease Guidelines for Reporting Outcomes in Trial Protocols: The SPIRIT-Outcomes 2022 Extension Mass Violence and the Complex Spectrum of Mental Illness and Mental Functioning Neuropsychiatry Sequelae of COVID-19 A New Framework for Dementia Nomenclature Organization and Performance of US Health Systems Pharmacy Benefit Managers: History, Business Practices, Economics, and Policy Promoting EDI in Genetics Research PTSD and Cardiovascular Disease Red Blood Cell Transfusion: 2023 AABB International Guidelines Reimagining Children’s Rights in the US Spirituality in Serious Illness and Health The US Medicaid Program: Coverage, Financing, Reforms, and Implications for Health Equity
USPSTF RECOMMENDATION STATEMENTS
Screening for Colorectal Cancer Screening for Hypertension Screening for Lung Cancer Screening for Prediabetes and Type 2 Diabetes In Children Screening for Prediabetes and Type 2 Diabetes In Adults Statins for Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease Vitamin and Mineral Supplements for Primary Prevention of of Cardiovascular Disease and Cancer
BLOGS
AMA Style Insider
INFORMATION
For Authors For Institutions & Librarians For Advertisers For Subscription Agents For Employers & Job Seekers For the Media Equity, Diversity, Inclusion Online Commenting Policy Public Access and Open Access Policy Statement on Potentially Offensive Content
JAMA NETWORK PRODUCTS
AMA Manual of Style JAMAevidence Peer Review Congress
JN LEARNING
Home State CME Clinical Challenge CME Atrial Fibrillation Course Women's Health Course CME / MOC Reporting Preferences About CME & MOC
Subscriptions & Renewals Manage Emails Update My Address Support Center My Account
JAMA CAREER CENTER
Physician Job Listings
       
 
Get the latest from JAMA
Email address
Sign Up
Privacy Policy | Terms of Use
Jama Network Logo
© 2024 American Medical Association. All rights reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
Terms of Use| Privacy Policy| Accessibility Statement| Cookie Settings

Silverchair Logo