Publication No. 155F23001
September 2023
epa.gov/schools
Schools as Cleaner Air and Cooling Centers
Tips for Parents and Caregivers
Communities are facing the impacts of climate change, including severe health consequences from heat 
waves and wildfires. EPA launched a pilot project in 2021 called Schools as Community Cleaner Air and 
Cooling Centers to address the combined hazards of extreme heat and wildfire smoke with a focus on 
spaces that serve children. The goals of this project are to support practical strategies for safeguarding 
children in schools during heat and smoke events. Parents and caregivers can be champions for facility 
improvements and other steps to keep kids safe during the school day and during heat and smoke 
events. This fact sheet can help you keep your children safe at home or at school.
DOES YOUR SCHOOL HAVE A PLAN?
As each local municipality may have a different action 
plan for heat and smoke events, check in with school 
leadership to find out if the school follows any local, city, 
or state level plans. For example plans for smoke and heat 
safety in schools, please refer to the following resources:  
Washington’s Smoke from Wildfires – Toolkit and Arizona’s 
Heat Safety - School Toolkit.
Parents and caregivers can work with school 
administrators, principals, and even teachers to find out 
answers to some of the following questions:
Does your child’s classroom and other learning spaces 
have cooling capability? If not, what other measures are in 
place during extreme heat events?
Does your child’s classroom have ventilation and filtration, 
and is this adjusted during wildfire smoke events? If not, 
would a letter of support or other action from parents and 
caregivers be helpful?
It is important to also check plans for transportation to 
and from school so that your child can be shielded from 
the heat or smoke during the ride to and from
school. If your home has better air conditioning and air 
cleaning provisions than the classroom environment,
a virtual alternative could be discussed with teachers 
and principals. Having fewer students in the classroom 
may help reduce the stress of the air conditioning units, 
thereby providing better relief for the students who
rely on the classroom space as their main source of air 
conditioning and clean air.
HOW TO TALK TO YOUR KIDS
As schools prepare physical buildings to be safe during 
extreme heat and wildfire smoke events, it is important for 
families and students to understand the risks and ways to 
stay safe, both in school and at home.
The following sources are available for caretakers to help 
understand and talk to their children about the dangers of 
heat and wildfire smoke. Information is constantly being 
updated and translated into more languages. Some key 
websites to check for the latest information include www.
heat.gov and https://www.airnow.gov/wildfires/. Parents 
may also want to have quick reference guides to recognize 
signs and symptoms of heat-related illness.
FOR CHILDREN: EXTREME HEAT
CDC: Ready Wrigley Books
Available in English and Spanish
Children’s books on preparing for wildfires and smoke and 
one on extreme heat with dog Ready Wrigley
Ready.gov Ready Kids | En español
Tools, games, and information on preparing for disasters 
for kids, teens, parents, and people who work with kids.
Publication No. 155F23001
September 2023
epa.gov/schools
FOR CHILDREN: WILDFIRES AND AIR QUALITY 
AirNow
Air Quality Flag Program for students | En español
Includes resources to teach children about the 
environment, clean air, and wildfires
Why is Coco Orange? | En español
Children’s book on air quality and staying healthy during 
poor air quality events
Why is Coco Red? | En español
Children’s book on how wildfires can affect air quality 
and health
Piplo Productions, Trinka and Sam: The Big Fire
Available in multiple languages
Story on recovery after a fire
Ready.gov Ready Kids | En español
Tools, games, and information on preparing for disasters 
for kids, teens, parents, and people who work with kids
FOR PARENTS/CAREGIVERS: WILDFIRES AND 
AIR QUALITY
Ready.gov Ready Kids | En español

EPA webinar with experts on wildfire smoke, mental 
health, and green cleaning
Available in English and Spanish

CDC: Protecting children from wildfire smoke
Available in English and Spanish
Western States Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty 
Unit (WSPEHSU)
Some information available in English and Spanish
Wildfires and children’s health
A Story of Health
National Child Traumatic Stress Network (NCTSN)
Available in multiple languages | Wildfire Resources
FOR PARENTS/CAREGIVERS: EXTREME HEAT
CDC: Heat and Infants and Children
Available in English and Spanish
National Child Traumatic Stress Network (NCTSN)
Information available in multiple languages
Extreme Heat Resources
Sunwise | Available in English and Spanish
CLEAN AIR IN THE HOME
During a smoke event, upgraded air filters and portable air 
cleaners can improve air quality, and EPA has guidance on 
Air Cleaners and Air Filters in the Home. EPA also offers 
guidance on how to Create a Clean Room, or dedicated 
space with cleaner air during a wildfire. If air cleaners 
and filters are not available, a do-it-yourself (DIY) air 
cleaner may be a temporary solution. Steps and additional 
information on how to build your own DIY air cleaner can 
be found at the EPA’s website here: : Wildfires and Indoor 
Air Quality (IAQ)
AIR FLOW
20” X 20” air filter
Suggested rating: MERV 13
20” X 20” box fan
Only use certified fans 
with UL or ETL marking
(2012 model or newer)
1.Attach the air filter 
to the back of the 
box fan using either 
clamps, duct tape or 
bungee cords.
2.Check the filter for 
the direction of the 
air flow (marked on 
the side of the filter).
3.Replace filters when 
dirty. 
Materials
Assembly
Clamps
Duct Tape
Bungee Cords
or
or
DIY Air Cleaner to Reduce Wildfire Smoke Indoors
Learn about box fan safety tips: 
https://www.epa.gov/air-research/research-diy-air-cleaners-reduce-wildfire-smoke-indoors#FAQ
Figure 1: DIY air cleaner instructions
CONTACT: EPAchildren@epa.gov
