Publication No. 155F23002 
September 2023
epa.gov/schools
Schools as Cleaner Air and Cooling Centers
Tips for Facilities Managers
Communities are facing the impacts of climate change, including severe health consequences from 
heat waves and wildfires. EPA launched a pilot project in 2021 called Schools as Community Cleaner 
Air and Cooling Centers to address the combined hazards of extreme heat and wildfire smoke with 
a focus on spaces that serve children. The goals of this project are to support practical strategies for 
safeguarding children in schools during heat and smoke events.
Well-operated buildings play a critical role in protecting students from the harmful impacts of 
heat and smoke. Facilities managers can be champions for practical smoke and heat mitigation 
strategies, including upgrades to filtration and cooling systems, that can keep kids and staff safe 
during the school day. Facilities managers can also conduct building-wide vulnerability assessments 
and highlight deficiencies and vulnerabilities to appropriate decisionmakers. Facilities managers 
are encouraged to connect with district leadership, staff, and teachers to understand any changes in 
practice and to get feedback on conditions in different spaces during different times of the day. This 
fact sheet can help you take the first steps toward upgrading school facilities for extreme heat and 
wildfire smoke mitigation.
HEALTHY LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS 
BENEFIT SCHOOL SYSTEMS
Facilities managers play a crucial role in addressing 
environmental challenges for the school community. 
Creating a safe, clean-air environment in schools is vital 
for children, especially for children with additional 
health vulnerabilities or in places with more persistent 
or extreme climate risks. Extreme heat events, wildfire 
smoke, and viruses like COVID-19 are all hazards to the 
students, faculty, and staff of the school system. Facilities 
managers can help reduce the impact of these hazards by 
ensuring that the facilities’ HVAC system(s) are properly 
maintained and able to maintain thermal comfort and 
indoor air quality during heat waves, wildfires, and 
periods of increased cases of infectious disease. Plus, 
improvements to a building and its HVAC systems can not 
only ensure the health and safety of building occupants 
during these events but can also provide a number of 
health and energy benefits throughout the year.
Generally, facilities managers should prioritize efficient 
ventilation, air filtration systems, and preventive measures 
such as reducing light levels, checking building envelope 
integrity, maintaining air conditioning units, and using 
window coverings to minimize heat gain.
During smoke events, efforts should focus on preventing 
outside smoke from entering the building, including 
sealing cracks and openings, and maintaining a positively 
pressurized environment. Efforts should also include 
enhanced filtration to reduce levels of smoke and particles 
indoors, including by upgrading furnace filters. Portable 
air cleaners can also be used, such as in areas not 
served by the building’s HVAC system and in areas with 
a higher density of occupants. Transportation logistics 
and ensuring parental support during such events pose 
significant challenges for school systems and emergency 
management teams. Include these details in the facility’s 
emergency management plan to be prepared.
Outside of the school community, low-income residents 
and seniors can be particularly vulnerable to heat and 
smoke events, especially if they live in homes with 
inadequate air filtration, cooling equipment, or insulation 
from smoke intrusion. In some communities, schools 
serve as a cleaner air and cooling center for members 
of the public, especially in vulnerable communities. 
Understanding the capacity of the filtration and cooling 
systems will help the facility managers prepare the 
building, or portions of the building, to serve this 
extended community during a heat or smoke event.
Portable air cleaners can be employed within classrooms 
or other critical spaces. Please see EPA’s page on air 
cleaners and air filters for more information.
Publication No. 155F23002 
September 2023
epa.gov/schools
OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE 
CONSIDERATIONS
For facilities that do not have HVAC systems, passive 
strategies can help mitigate the effects of heat and smoke. 
During a heat wave, take steps to reduce the solar heat gain 
of the building: provide shading or cover windows, make 
sure that windows and doors are well-sealed, and reduce 
the buildings’ power output. For smoke events, ensure that 
the building is well-sealed to prevent smoke from seeping 
into the building. Provide a portable filtration unit if no 
building HVAC systems exists. 
For facilities that have HVAC systems, facilities managers 
should do proactive maintenance before a heat wave to ensure 
the system is well maintained and do continual diagnostic/
maintenance during the event. Conduct regular maintenance 
including inspection and cleaning of HVAC coils, replacing or 
cleaning air filters, and maintaining fan motors.
Higher-efficiency filters are recommended (MERV-13 
minimum, or as high as the system allows), not only during 
smoke events, but year-round to provide public health and 
indoor air quality benefits. In addition, determine if the 
outside air inlet at the HVAC system can be retrofitted to 
install carbon filters. A positively pressurized building is 
effective in keeping smoke out of the building. As such, 
ensuring that the building’s exhaust airflows are balanced 
with the ventilation airflows is crucial to ensure smoke 
does not seep into the building from cracks in the exterior.
Figure 2: Sources of airborne aerosols and their infiltration
Figure 3: Sources of smoke inflitration during a smoke event
Figure 1: Sources of heat within a typical classroom
DESIGN CONDITIONS OVERVIEW
Figure 4 provides summarized recommendations for 
preparing classroom environments for various events, 
including SARS-CoV-2 and some other viral airborne 
illnesses (e.g., influenza), smoke, heat waves, and 
combined heat and smoke events.  For SARS-COV-2, 
using higher efficiency filters minimum MERV-13 and 
increasing ventilation rates are recommended. When 
setting a ventilation rate, follow CDC recommendations as 
everyday post pandemic best practices. For more specific 
information on setting a ventilation rate during pandemic 
conditions, please see ASHRAE 241. Additionally, 
enhanced air cleaning systems such as UV irradiation 
systems can be considered. However, note that enhanced 
air cleaning technologies may be new/emerging and are 
therefore understudied and not recommended at this time 
(such as bipolar ionization).
During smoke events, employing higher efficiency 
filters (minimum MERV-13), while maintaining proper 
ventilation rates (avoid closing outside air dampers 
completely), and using carbon filters to remove smoke 
odors are recommended. In heat waves, it is important 
to check and maintain HVAC systems, employ passive 
strategies to reduce cooling demand, and ensure rooftop 
surfaces where equipment is located are white to mitigate 
heat islanding.
CONTACT: EPAchildren@epa.gov
Publication No. 155F23002 
September 2023
epa.gov/schools
Figure 4: Design Condition Matrix Overview by System.
DESIGN CONDITION MATRIX
SARS-COV-21
SMOKE (WILDFIRES) 1
HEAT WAVES1
HEAT AND SMOKE1
PM 2.5/PM 10 Filtration2
MERV 13 filters or as high as 
your HVAC can handle. Consult 
with a professional as needed.
MERV 13 filters or as high as your 
HVAC can handle. Consult with a 
professional as needed.
Code minimum MERV 13 filters 
recommended for increased air 
quality.
MERV 13 filters or as high as your 
HVAC can handle. Consult with a 
professional as needed.
Enhanced Air Scrubbing2
Ultraviolet light 
(optional)
Carbon filters to address smoke 
odors. 
N/A
Carbon filters to address smoke 
odors. 
Ventilation
Follow CDC recommendations 
as everyday post pandemic 
best practices.
For more specific information 
on setting a ventilation rate 
during pandemic conditions 
please see ASHRAE 241.
Ventilation with unfiltered 
outdoor air is not recommended 
during a smoke event. Close 
doors and windows. Building 
envelope should be monitored to 
limit smoke from seeping in 
through doors, windows, and 
vents. Prepare to add 
supplemental filtration at the 
intake air vent, where possible. 
See EPA guidance for more info.
Use either conditional outdoor 
air, if possible, otherwise attempt 
to supply equivalent ventilation 
in the form of enhanced filtration 
(MERV 13 or greater) and/or 
supplemental air cleaner.
Follow guidance in previous two 
boxes.
Cooling Capacity
Increased capacity to address 
increased ventilation.
N/A
Meet increased cooling 
requirements via mechanical and 
passive cooling solutions.
Meet increased cooling 
requirements via mechanical and 
passive cooling solutions.
Heating Capacity
Increased capacity to address 
increased ventilation.
N/A
N/A
N/A
Fan Performance
Improve fan performance to 
overcome increased filtration 
pressure drop.
Improve fan performance to 
overcome increased filtration 
pressure drop.
Improve fan performance to 
achieve max supply design 
airflow.
Improve fan performance to 
overcome increased filtration 
pressure drop & achieve max 
supply design airflow.
Max Temperature 
Equipment Concerns
N/A
N/A
Confirm with equipment 
manufacturers for max operating 
temperature limitations. 125F is a 
common limit, however, it is not 
a universal limitation and 
manufacturers should be 
consulted.
Confirm with equipment 
manufacturers for max operating 
temperature limitations. 125F is a 
common limit, however, it is not a 
universal limitation and 
manufacturers should be 
consulted.
Building Pressurization
N/A
Positive
N/A
Positive
Portable Filtration Units
Portable filtration units 
provide benefit.
In addition to HVAC filter 
improvements (see above), 
provide supplemental air 
cleaning with portable filtration 
units, including in areas not 
served by an HVAC system or 
with a higher density of building 
occupants.
N/A
In addition to HVAC filter 
improvements (see above), 
provide supplemental air cleaning 
with portable filtration units, 
including in areas not served by an 
HVAC system or with a higher 
density of building occupants.
Additional Notes
Health protocols such as social 
distancing, mask use, cleaning 
surfaces, etc. that extend 
beyond HVAC should be 
deployed. Refer to your local 
health agency and the Center 
for Disease Control for 
additional guidance.
Monitor indoor air quality in a 
representative space. Consider 
mask use should poor air quality 
persist after exhausting 
applicable HVAC modifications. 
Repairs to the building envelope 
and keeping doors and windows 
shut will also reduce smoke 
entrainment.
Repairs to the building envelope 
and keeping doors and windows 
shut will also reduce heat 
entrainment.
Cover windows with shades or 
drapes to limit solar heat gain. If 
the air outside is hotter than the 
air inside, close windows. If 
outside air is cooler, open 
windows.
Follow guidance in previous two 
boxes.
NOTES
1: Strategies for SARS-CoV2 should be considered for all design conditions as a post pandemic best practice.
2: Refer to Pages 15-17 of the ASHRAE Planning Framework for Protecting Commercial Building Occupants from Smoke During Wildfire Events
(https://www.ashrae.org/File%20Library/Technical%20Resources/COVID-19/Planning-Framework-for-Protecting-Commercial-Building-
Occupants-from-Smoke-During-Wildfire-Events.pdf) for adding additional filters and pressure drop to existing fan systems.
3: For latest guidance on equivalent air changes, refer to ASHRAE Standard 241 – Control of Infectious Aerosols
(https://www.ashrae.org/technical-resources/standards-and-guidelines/read-only-versions-of-ashrae-standards)
CDC and ASHRAE guidance may not always align. It is up to the facility manager to decide what is best for their facility.
