
Skip directly to site contentSkip directly to search
Español | Other Languages
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People
Natural Disasters and Severe Weather
Natural Disasters and Severe Weather
Wildfires
Stay Safe After a Wildfire
Español (Spanish) Print
Smoked-filled forest in the aftermath of a wildfire.
If your home was affected by a wildfire, do not return home until authorities say it is safe. Take steps to protect yourself and your loved ones.

Continue to check air quality reports.
Take steps to reduce your exposure to smoke [PDF – 817 KB]. Smoke can stay in the air for days after a wildfire ends.
Wildfires leave behind a lot of ash [PDF – 835 KB] that can irritate your eyes, nose, or skin and cause coughing and other health effects.
Children and people with asthma, COPD, heart disease, or who are pregnant need to be especially careful about breathing wildfire smoke.
Protect yourself against ash when you clean up. Wear gloves, long-sleeved shirts, long pants, and shoes and socks to protect your skin. Wear goggles to protect your eyes.
Wash off any ash that gets on your skin or in your eyes or mouth as soon as you can.
Children should not do any cleanup work.
Limit how much ash you breathe in by wearing an N95 respirator [PDF – 329 KB]. A respirator is a mask that fits tightly to your face to filter out ash before you can breathe it in.  You must wear a respirator correctly [PDF – 2.7 MB]. Respirators are not made to fit children.  If you have heart or lung disease ask your doctor if it is safe for you to wear a respirator.
Pay attention to any health symptoms if you or your children have asthma, COPD, heart disease, or are pregnant. Get to medical help if you need it.
After a wildfire, private wells can be contaminated and unsafe to use for drinking water and other purposes. Learn about potential solutions.
Drive safely.
Be alert for broken traffic lights and missing street signs.
Watch out for trash and debris on the road.
Learn more: Motor Vehicle Safety
Be careful around damaged buildings or structures.
Wait to return to buildings during daylight hours, when it is easier to avoid hazards, especially if the electricity is off and you have no lights.
Learn more: Worker Safety During Fire Cleanup
Clean up safely.
Wear proper safety equipment, avoid carbon monoxide poisoning, and avoid electrical hazards.
Learn more: Clean Up Safely After a Disaster
Protect your emotional well-being.
After a wildfire, you may feel sad, mad, guilty, or numb. These are all normal reactions to stress. Talk to a psychologist, social worker, or professional counselor if you need help coping.

Infographic: Be Ready! Hurricanes Ready: Prepare. Plan. Stay Informed. Social Media at CDC Emergency
Last Reviewed: May 18, 2023
Source: ﻿ National Center for Environmental Health (NCEH), Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR), National Center for Injury Prevention and Control (NCIPC)
Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Syndicate
home
Natural Disasters and Severe Weather
Earthquakes
plus icon
Extreme Heat
plus icon
Floods
plus icon
Hurricanes
plus icon
Landslides & Mudslides
Lightning
plus icon
Tornadoes
plus icon
Tsunamis
plus icon
Volcanoes
plus icon
Wildfires
plus icon
Preparing for Wildfires
Stay Safe During a Wildfire
Stay Safe After a Wildfire
Worker Safety During Fire Cleanup
Related Links
Winter Weather
plus icon
Disaster Resources
plus icon
Health and Safety Concerns for All Disasters
plus icon
Coping with a Disaster or Traumatic Event
plus icon
Prepare Your Health
Information for Specific Groups
Disaster Evacuation Centers
plus icon
About CDC
Contact Us
800-232-4636
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
LinkedIn
Youtube
Pinterest
Snapchat
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
Accessibility
External Links
Privacy
Policies
No Fear Act
FOIA
Nondiscrimination
OIG
Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
USA.gov