
Skip directly to site contentSkip directly to search
Español | Other Languages
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People
Natural Disasters and Severe Weather
Natural Disasters and Severe Weather
Wildfires
Stay Safe During a Wildfire
Español (Spanish) Print
Active wildfire burning trees in a mountain forest.
Stay safe during a fire. Pay attention to local weather forecasts, especially those that may affect fire conditions, and always follow instructions given by local emergency management officials.

Protect yourself from smoke.
When wildfires create smoky conditions it’s important for everyone to reduce their exposure to smoke. Wildfire smoke irritates your eyes, nose, throat, and lungs. It can make it hard to breathe and make you cough or wheeze. Children and people with asthma, COPD, heart disease, or who are pregnant need to be especially careful about breathing wildfire smoke.


Keep smoke outside.

Choose a room you can close off from outside air.
Set up a portable air cleaner or a filter to keep the air in this room clean even when it’s smoky in the rest of the building and outdoors. If you use a do-it-yourself box fan filtration unit, never leave it unattended.
Reduce your smoke exposure by wearing a respirator [PDF – 329 KB].

A respirator is a mask that fits tightly to your face to filter out smoke before you breathe it in.
You must wear the right respirator and wear it correctly [PDF – 2.7 MB]. Children ages 2 years and older can wear respirators and masks. However, NIOSH Approved respirators do not come in suitable sizes for very young children.
If you have heart or lung disease ask your doctor if it is safe for you to wear a respirator.
Avoid using candles, gas, propane, wood-burning stoves, fireplaces, or aerosol sprays and don’t fry or broil meat, smoke tobacco products, or vacuum.
If you have a central air conditioning system, use high efficiency filters to capture fine particles from smoke. If your system has a fresh air intake, set the system to recirculate mode or close the outdoor intake damper.
Pets and other animals can be affected by wildfire smoke too.

Learn how to protect pets and livestock.
Some evacuation centers do not accept animals. Check Petfinder’s Shelter Center or RedRover for information on local animal shelters and rescue groups
Keep track of fires near you so you can be ready.

AirNow’s “Fire and Smoke Map” has a map of fires throughout North America.
NOAA’s “Fire weather outlook” page maps fire watches and warnings.
Listen to the Emergency Alert System (EAS) and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Weather Radio for emergency alerts.
Pay attention to any health symptoms if you have asthma, COPD, heart disease, or are pregnant. Get medical help if you need it.

Learn more about protecting yourself from wildfire smoke.

Evacuate safely.
You may be asked by public authorities to evacuate or you may decide to evacuate. Read about how to evacuate safely and how to develop a family disaster plan, including:

Finding out what could happen to you
Making a disaster plan
Completing the checklist
Practicing your plan
Stay healthy during power outages.
Large fires can cause long-term power outages. Read about what to do if your power goes out, including:

Preventing carbon monoxide poisoning
Food safety
Safe drinking water
Power line hazards
Infographic: Be Ready! Hurricanes Ready: Prepare. Plan. Stay Informed. Social Media at CDC Emergency
Last Reviewed: June 12, 2023
Source: ﻿ National Center for Environmental Health (NCEH), Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR), National Center for Injury Prevention and Control (NCIPC)
Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Syndicate
home
Natural Disasters and Severe Weather
Earthquakes
plus icon
Extreme Heat
plus icon
Floods
plus icon
Hurricanes
plus icon
Landslides & Mudslides
Lightning
plus icon
Tornadoes
plus icon
Tsunamis
plus icon
Volcanoes
plus icon
Wildfires
plus icon
Preparing for Wildfires
Stay Safe During a Wildfire
Stay Safe After a Wildfire
Worker Safety During Fire Cleanup
Related Links
Winter Weather
plus icon
Disaster Resources
plus icon
Health and Safety Concerns for All Disasters
plus icon
Coping with a Disaster or Traumatic Event
plus icon
Prepare Your Health
Information for Specific Groups
Disaster Evacuation Centers
plus icon
About CDC
Contact Us
800-232-4636
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
LinkedIn
Youtube
Pinterest
Snapchat
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
Accessibility
External Links
Privacy
Policies
No Fear Act
FOIA
Nondiscrimination
OIG
Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
USA.gov