EPA-456/F-17-003  
March 2017 
 
The Air Quality Flag Program and Older Adults      
Why should older adults care about air pollution?  
As people get older, their bodies are less able to compensate for the effects of 
environmental hazards. Air pollution, like ozone, particle pollution (PM), and especially 
fine particle pollution (PM2.5), is most likely to affect the health of older adults. 
Fine particle pollution has been linked to premature death, 
cardiac arrhythmias and heart attacks, asthma attacks, and 
the development of chronic bronchitis. Ozone, even at low 
levels, can aggravate respiratory diseases. This leads to 
increased use of medication, more visits to health care 
providers, admissions to emergency rooms and hospitals, and 
even death. 
What can you do to reduce your exposure to air pollution?  
• Check the Air Quality Index (AQI) at www.airnow.gov. The AQI reports how clean 
the air is and whether it can affect your health. 
• Use the air quality activity guidelines* to find out what outdoor activities are best 
for you based on the current and forecasted air quality. When the AQI is 
unhealthy, for example, you may want to take more rest breaks, or walk instead 
of jog. 
• Ask a local organization, such as your senior center, library, fire station or 
museum, to start an Air Quality Flag Program.  
 
What is the Air Quality Flag Program?  
Air Quality Flag Program participants raise a flag that 
corresponds to the AQI forecast, which alerts the community to 
the potential for unhealthy air. The color of the flag matches 
EPA's Air Quality Index (AQI): green, yellow, orange, red, and 
purple.  
On unhealthy days, you can adjust physical activities to help 
reduce exposure to air pollution while still keeping active. 
Remember, air quality changes like the weather, so check your 
AQI before making plans. Go to www.airnow.gov/flag for more 
information. The air quality flags are a daily reminder to be 
aware of your air! 
* https://www.airnow.gov/index.cfm?action=flag_program.outdoorguid 
