 
 
Wildfires: Tips for Parents on Media Coverage 
 
While the media (television, radio, print and the internet) can help inform and educate you and your 
children during wildfires, media coverage unfortunately also has the potential to upset and confuse. 
As parents, you can protect your children by helping them understand media coverage while limiting 
their exposure to distressing images. 
 
The impact of media coverage will be different depending upon whether you are: 
 
• 
A family currently evacuated viewing for the first time your home or neighborhood 
destroyed 
• 
A family viewing images from home of a wildfire nearby which could spread to your area 
• 
A family who has been affected by fire in the past 
• 
A family not directly threatened who is viewing news about the impact that wildfires are 
having on others (loss of their home, belongings, pets, school or church buildings) 
 
Children and families who suffer loss in the wildfires are the most vulnerable to negative effects from 
excessive media viewing. 
 
Understanding Media Exposure 
 
• 
Media coverage can produce increased fears and anxiety in children.  
• 
The more time children spend watching coverage of the wildfires, the more likely they are to 
have negative reactions. 
• 
Graphic images and news stories of loss may be particularly upsetting to children. 
• 
Very young children may not understand that the coverage and repetition of images from an 
earlier or past event is a replay. They may think the event is continuing to happen or is 
happening again.  
• 
Excessive exposure to the media coverage may interfere with children’s recovery after an 
event. 
 
What Parents Can Do to Help 
 
• 
Limit Your Children’s Exposure to Media Coverage 
o The younger the child, the less exposure s/he should have.  
o You may choose to eliminate all exposure for very young children. 
o Play DVDs or videotapes of their favorite shows or movies instead. 
o Consider family activities away from television, radio, or internet. 
• 
Watch and Discuss with Children 
o Watch what they watch. 
o Discuss the news stories with them, asking about their thoughts and feelings about 
what they saw, read, or heard. 
o Ask older children and teens about what they have seen on the internet, in order to 
get a better sense of their thoughts, fears, concerns, and point-of-view. 
• 
Seize Opportunities for Communication 
o Use newsbreaks that interrupt family viewing or newspaper images as opportunities 
to open conversation. Be available to talk about their feelings, thoughts, and 
concerns, and reassure them of their safety and of plans to keep them safe, if 
needed, such as evacuation. 
• 
Clear Up Any Misunderstandings 
o Don’t presume you know what your children are thinking; ask if they are worried and 
discuss those worries with them, reassuring them as needed. 
o Ask questions to find out if your children are understanding the situation accurately; 
they may think they are at risk when they are not. 
• 
Monitor Adult Conversations 
o Watch what you and other adults say about the wildfires or the media coverage in 
front of the children; children often listen when adults are unaware and may 
misconstrue what they hear.  
• 
Let Your Children Know about Successful Community Efforts 
o You may want to share positive media images, such as reports that the fire has been 
contained in areas or news stories of people or animals brought to safety.  
o Reassure your children the firefighters are working very hard to put out the fire. This 
will give them a sense that adults are actively taking steps to protect them, their 
home, their pets, and their neighborhood. 
• 
Educate Yourself 
o Learn about children’s common reactions to wildfires or other natural disasters.  
o Know that many children are resilient and cope well, but some may have continuing 
difficulties. These reactions vary with age and exposure to the event. 
o For more information, see Parent Guidelines for Helping Children Impacted by 
Wildfires. 
 
When Your Family is Part of the Story 
 
• 
Know Your Limits 
o Decide if it’s a good idea for you or your children to talk to the media. While it’s 
natural to want to tell your story, the media may not be the best place to do so.  
o Think about what you are willing and not willing to discuss. You have the right to set 
limits with reporters. 
o Ask the reporter for the purpose of the story and its content. 
• 
Protect Your Children 
o Make sure the reporter has had experience working with children in the past. 
o Talk it over with your children before they are interviewed. Assure them that there are 
no wrong answers. 
o Let them know they can say “no” to any question and they can stop the interview at 
any time. 
o Be present when your child is interviewed. Stop the interview if s/he becomes upset 
or distressed in any way.  
o After the interview, discuss the experience with your children. Praise them for doing a 
great job and listen carefully to any concerns they have. 
o Prepare your children that the final media story may be very short or may be edited in 
ways that do not reflect their experience.  
 
 
Further information about children, families, and wildfires can be found at the website of the 
National Child Traumatic Stress Network, www.NCTSN.org. 
