Skip directly to site contentSkip directly to search
Español | Other Languages
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People
Air Quality
CDC
Air Quality
Wildfire Smoke
Wildfire Smoke and Pregnancy
Español (Spanish) Print
Pregnancy is a time to take extra care to protect yourself against wildfire smoke.

Before wildfire season:
Plan how you will protect yourself against wildfire smoke. Talk to your healthcare provider about where you will get prenatal care or deliver your baby if your doctor’s office or hospital is closed. Make sure you know the signs of labor and early labor.
Stock up on medicine. Store a 7 to 10-day supply of prescription medicines and prenatal vitamins in a waterproof, childproof container to take with you if you evacuate.
Keep a packed bag on hand with essential items and supplies for both the mother and baby, including clothing, and copies of your medical records and insurance information.
Buy groceries you won’t need to cook. Frying or grilling especially can make indoor air pollution worse.
During a wildfire smoke event:
Pay attention to air quality reports. Follow instructions about exercise and going outside for “sensitive individuals.”
Follow your healthcare provider’s advice. Continue with your pre-natal care. Update your delivery plan if you need to evacuate.
Know the signs of labor and early labor. If you have the signs, call your healthcare provider or 9-1-1, or go to the hospital right away if it is safe to travel.
Think about evacuating if you have trouble breathing or other symptoms that do not get better.
If you go to a shelter, make sure officials know that you are pregnant.
Stay inside as much as possible. Keep windows and doors closed and turn on an HVAC system or use a portable air filtration unit.
If your area is experiencing extreme heat, contact your local health department to find public access air-conditioned centers or cooling centers in your area.
If you must go outdoors during a Wildfire Smoke event, wear a  NIOSH Approved N95 respirator.
After a wildfire:
Do not return home until you are told it is safe to do so.
Smoke can stay in the air inside buildings and outdoors for days after wildfires have ended so continue to check local air quality.
Protect yourself from ash [PDF – 835 KB]. Avoid direct contact with ash and wash it off your skin or mouth and rinse it out of your eyes as soon as you can.
Related Links
Safety Messages For Pregnant, Postpartum, and Breastfeeding Women During Disasters
Last Reviewed: July 19, 2023
Source: National Center for Environmental Health
Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Syndicate
home
Air Quality
Air Pollutants
Wildfire Smoke
plus icon
Guidance for Health Professionals
People with Chronic Conditions
Precautions for Pregnant Women
Protecting Children from Wildfire Smoke
Before a Wildfire Smoke Event
During a Wildfire Smoke Event
After a Wildfire Smoke Event
Communication Tools
Infographics
plus icon
Ozone and Your Health
Particle Pollution
plus icon
Air Quality Resources for Professionals
Volcanoes and Air Quality
FEMA Trailer Study
plus icon
About CDC
Contact Us
800-232-4636
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
LinkedIn
Youtube
Pinterest
Snapchat
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
Accessibility
External Links
Privacy
Policies
No Fear Act
FOIA
Nondiscrimination
OIG
Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
USA.gov