 Hello everyone. Thank you so much for joining us for today's session. We're going to be getting started with our webinar in just a few minutes. Before we get started, I do have some housekeeping announcements and announcements about upcoming events that I'd love to share with all of you as folks get logged into the webinar today. Upcoming, we have Tuesday, August 10th. We've partnered with Travis Criss in the Southern California NIAH Education and Research Center for a free webinar on permeation through disposable nitrile gloves, gun cleaning solvents and gunshot residue. On Wednesday, August 18th, we've partnered with Colley Friends, PhD and APE and Mountain and Plains Education and Research Center for a free webinar on hazards in the craft brewing industry, understanding injuries through workers compensation data. On Wednesday, September 1st, we'll be joined by Rebecca K. Wurtman and Janet Thorilton for a webinar on supporting surgical smoke evacuation legislation through policy analysis. Dr. Holmes also let me know that the NIH NIEHS partnerships for environmental public health also just released a wildfire podcast. So I'll be putting that link in the chat if anyone is interested in checking that out after our webinar today. For more information, you're welcome to visit us online at cvh at Berkeley.edu, backslash about CE. And on behalf of the Center for Occupational and Environmental Health, I'd like to welcome you to today's webinar, wildfire smoke exposure and kids, how to mitigate health effects presented by Stephanie home, MD, PhD, MPH. Thank you for being here with us today. If you're going to be muted during the presentation, if you'd like to ask a question, please enter it into the online Q&A box. We'll be saving time at the end of the presentation to address as many questions as possible. This presentation is being recorded and will be made available on the Center for Occupational and Environmental Health YouTube page. If you're interested in those who logged in for registration email for the full live presentation today, we'll receive an email tomorrow, the link to the recording and an evaluation form that will qualify you for a certificate of completion with one continuing education contact hour. Once the evaluation is completed, you'll be able to access and print your certificate. So, if you're a do, it is my pleasure to welcome our presenter for today. Dr. Stephanie home, MD, PhD, MPH is an environmental pediatrician and epidemiologist. She's the co director of Western States Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Unit, because research on air pollution effects on children's health and works half time at California EPA in the office of Environmental Health Passenger Assessment. She has a medical degree from the University of Pittsburgh and did postgraduate medical training at the Children's Hospital in Oakland and University of California San Francisco and got her PhD at UC Berkeley. She has been heavily involved in work and health effects of wildfire smoke and children and public health strategies for mitigation for the last few years. Thanks so much for being here. We're looking forward to your presentation. Thank you, Michelle. So, I will start with just my usual disclosures, which is just to say that I am lucky enough to get funding from be employed by multiple agencies and groups, but that my presentation is my own and not representing official stances of any of my various employers or funders. All right, so what do we go over today? So first we're going to just briefly touch on the scope of the issue, which I imagine many of you are familiar with, if, especially if you live here in California, we'll talk about why children are especially vulnerable to wildfire smoke exposures. We'll talk about the health effects of wildfire smoke exposure and children, and then we'll talk about some public health considerations, how to know if the air is bad, how to improve your indoor air, what kind of masks or options for kids, and then go from there. All right, so the first thing I like to say is just a reminder that wildfires, even individual wildfire events can expose very large populations to smoke. So this is an image from last fall. This is October 1st when we had multiple fires burning around the state of California. Those of you who are local may remember that there were lightning strikes that happened in multiple areas simultaneously set off a number of fires. And so you can see, you know, there were a number of fires burning, but there's also smoke covering a much larger area, right, not just local to those individual fires, but really blanketing much of the state of California. The images on the writer actually from around the same time period, these are pictures that I took here in the Bay Area. You can see that at that time, the closest fire to us was hundreds of miles away. And yet you can see just visually how bad the smoke was on some different days. So these are all images that I took from the same location around noon on different days, and you can really see the drop off in visibility. So the image at the top is a day when the AQI is in the green range. That's the good range. And you can see sort of if you look off into the distance there, there's kind of three sets of hills, right. There's a close one on the right that's green. There's that middle set of hills, and then there's a third set off in the distance that you can see. Even moving from the green to the yellow range, which is the moderate AQI range, we already lose that third set of hills. I don't have one in the orange range because things were were jumping so fast I never managed to catch one there, but going into the red range, which is the unhealthy range. You can see we've lost that second set of hills, right. You can only see that closer one. And by the time you get into the hazardous range, you really can't even see that close hill at all anymore. The furthest thing you can see is this freeway on ramp, which is about half a mile from where I was taking the image, maybe a little closer as the crow flies. So, you know, really impressive drop in in visibility with increasing AQI. And I think it's just a nice example of just how impressive the smoke exposure can be even very far away from the smoke events. Obviously, remember that there are lots of things that can get in the way of your ability to assess AQI visually, right. Fog, rainy days, etc. You may not be able to tell us this certainly isn't something you want to rely on, but I do think it's a nice way to sort of remember how bad things can be. I often when I'm presenting to national audiences bring this up and I wasn't sure how many folks we might get from outside California today. So I thought I would mention this, which is that the NOAA, so National Oceanic atmosphere administration, estimates that there's going to be a really large increase in the number of weeks with risk of very large fires in a lot of areas across the country. So, I think it's comparing the mid 21st century to the end of the 20th century. And I think, you know, oftentimes sort of more national audiences think of wildfires as a California or Oregon problem. But if you look at the areas where the risk is really increasing the most, it's areas like Montana, Wisconsin, Minnesota, right sort of northern areas near the Great Lakes there. There's quite a large increase in Louisiana and parts of the deep South. And, you know, remembering that smoke from wildfire events can go hundreds of miles, this essentially means that the whole US is within or nearly the whole US is within smoke traveling distance of somewhere that's going to have an increase in large fires. Right. And so this is something that we should all be paying attention to if we're not already. All right, so why are children more vulnerable? I use the slide to talk about children's vulnerability to environmental health exposures in general. So we'll talk through each of these three points and then specifically relate them to wildfires. So the first is that children have differences in physiology that increase the dose of a pollutant that they get. So for example, for wildfire smoke and really any airborne exposure. Children breathe more air relative to their body size than adults do. Right. So if you're a medical person, that's the minute per kilo of a minute ventilation, right. You're taking in more air relative to your size. And so if you think about that in terms of sort of your ability to deal with a toxicant, children are getting a much higher load relative to their size than adults are. The second is that children have unique windows of growth and development. So, you know, we adults change somewhat over time, but much less than a child, right. If you think about how much my seven year old daughter has changed since the start of the pandemic, for example, that's much more than what I've changed during that time. You know, weight gain aside. And so, you know, I think children have these unique windows of growth and development where they may be changing quite rapidly. And so insults that happen during those periods can have particular effects, right. So if you think about puberty, for example, there are huge changes that happen in puberty. If you think about periods where children are in utero, there are huge changes that happen then. And so, and just in general, children are changing and growing more than adults. And so, you know, the first thing that kids have to do is to have kids that have behaviors and preferences that increase their exposure to environmental toxicants. So in the case of wildfire smoke, the biggest one is that kids actually spend more time outdoors and run around more than adults do. And on the whole, that's a really good thing, right. We want kids being active and we want them being outdoors. But that means that they're actually likely to get more exposure to outdoor air pollutants than adults are. Okay, so what's contained in wildfire smoke wildfire smoke is largely particulate matter. There are other components. We'll talk about those in a minute. But if you're not familiar particulate matter is sort of a grab bag term. This is something that doesn't have one specific chemical structure, but is instead defined by size. So PM 10 are particles 10 microns and diameter and smaller PM 2.5 or 2.5 microns and diameter and smaller. This is sort of a classic EPA image to just sort of hit home just how small these things are that we're talking about. So this large columnar structure in the middle is a single strand of hair. So if you look at your own hair, right. Imagine how thin that is. The idea is that five PM 10 roughly five to seven PM 10 could fit across the diameter of your human hair. And roughly 20 PM 2.5 can fit across that. So we're really, really small things that we're talking about. Particular matter makes up a large proportion of what's in wildfire smoke. It's also some of the best understood of the pollutants that are in wildfire smoke. And so I'm going to talk a lot about those. That being said, especially as wildfires hit what people often call the wooly, which is a very funny term. It stands for the wild land urban interface, especially as wildfires hit that interface. There may be more components of the smoke that are less under less well understood. So that can include things like volatile organic compounds. That can include things like airborne lead, right. As all of these things in our cities burn, there are lots of other components that can be released. That's definitely an area we're still learning a lot more about. There was an interesting report released by carb the California Air Resources Board. Just in the last couple of weeks showing that during the campfire in 2018 elevated airborne lead concentrations were measured as far away as San Jose. And so that's really interesting and. You know, definitely something that we should all be concerned about. But as I said, I'm going to focus mostly on particular matter because it's the component that's best understood. Alright, so what do we know about effects of particulate matter exposure from other research and air pollution research during non wildfire smoke times. So we know that particulate matter can have substantial respiratory effects that includes things like increasing asthma exacerbations, potentially increasing the risk of developing asthma in the first place. Increasing respiratory infections like pneumonia bronchitis, those sorts of things. There's data showing that increased particulate matter exposure can have metabolic and growth effects. So things like being associated with higher BMI changes in blood pressure changes and insulin sensitivity. There are no neuro cognitive effects. So things like decreases in IQ associated with particulate matter exposure. And then particulate matter is also a known carcinogen. And so you can have an increase in lifetime cancer risk associated with exposure to particular to particulate matter. What do we know specifically from studies during wildfire smoke times. So there are fewer of these. As you might expect, but there are some similar to what we know from particulate matter research more generally. There's a fair bit of data showing that they're both upper and lower respiratory effects. So when I say upper respiratory effects, I mean, the kind of things that you've probably all experienced during wildfire smoke events. It's eyes sore throat, sneezing, also an increase in upper respiratory infections like colds. And those there are decent data to show that in kids, especially, although likely also in adults. That there's a dose response relationship there that the longer you're exposed, the more likely it is that you'll have those kinds of symptoms. And that makes sense, right? That's sort of common sense, but we've also got data to back it up. There's also an increase in asthma exacerbations. So that means in kids who already have asthma, there's. And that's a higher risk of having asthma symptoms during wildfire smoke times. And that's been well enough study that we're sort of starting to look at which groups are at particular risk sort of which subgroups within kids with asthma have the most risk. And so there have been a couple recent studies looking at that that have shown that kids who are the youngest as mad ex. Even some of those kids that are what we would call early weasers and not truly as mad as yet. And kids with higher BMI might be at particular risk during wildfire smoke events. And then there's also increases in lower respiratory infections, things like pneumonia and bronchitis specifically associated with wildfire smoke exposure. And also a couple of studies that have started to suggest that there may be effects during pregnancy. So if a pregnant parent is exposed to wildfire smoke during pregnancy, there may be increased chance of lower birth weight and an increased chance of preterm birth associated with exposure any time during pregnancy. That's less well study, but there are a couple of studies in that area and enough that I'm concerned. All right. I figured I'd just call out a couple of new and particularly notable publications in the last year in this area. There have been a couple studies that have suggested that wildfire PM may have particularly strong effects compared to other particular matter. Particularly the regular at all 2021 got a lot of coverage in the popular press looking at PM associated with wildfire compared to sort of a general measure of PM overall and they found particularly strong effects for the wildfire associated PM on respiratory visits to a children's hospital. There have been some studies looking at other outcomes. So for example, a thought of do at all is a paper that associated wildfire PM 2.5 with clinic visits for a topic dermatitis. It's often called asthma. I'm sorry, exoma. And for it. So there's association that was during the campfire. And I was wondering if there was a particular high risk in indigenous populations. And this del Pozo Cruz one offended because this was actually looking at sort of the public health messaging and found that, you know, it wasn't until you got to pretty high QI levels. And I was hoping to change their behavior during wildfire smoke events, despite the fact that in their area in Australia, they were giving messaging to decrease outdoor exposures at lower levels. So some interesting work there. Last I just wanted to call your attention to an apologize. This isn't up yet. I was hoping it would be up by the time I gave this talk. But there was a workshop on wildfire smoke and children's health that happened in early May. It was led by us EPA, some of us at the Pesos and some Cal EPA folks. And we had participation from public health professionals, air quality professionals, school folks, a whole bunch of different stakeholders really talking about. Pardon me. Really talking about ways that we can respond to wildfire smoke events to best protect children, both in terms of homes and schools and sort of what the options are there. There were a number of work groups that worked on some products in the lead up to that workshop and put together essentially some public health messages that can be adapted by different groups, different agencies that are evidence based public health messages on how to decrease wildfire smoke exposure in children. And those things will be on the US EPA wildfire guide post publication page very soon. So I'm showing you on the right, the wildfire guide post publication update page. This is what it looks like. I know if you see this little children's health header and it says updates coming soon. Very soon it's sort of in the middle of some bureaucratic processes, but there should be the work group products from that workshop that has messages that you can use and adapt to your population if you work in public health on mask use for children on indoor air on activity guidelines for schools. So hopefully some really useful stuff will be there very soon. So let's talk a little bit about those responses now that we've covered some of the health effects for children. What are the different responses. I thought I'd start by just throwing the IQI up again. I've sort of referenced this already. And I am guessing, especially as wildfire smoke has become more common my experiences that lots of folks in this area are actually pretty familiar with this now, but the idea is that we have this scale green is good, yellow is moderate oranges on healthy for sensitive groups. We get unhealthy very unhealthy hazardous. And so the idea is that the US EPA uses their high quality monitoring stations to measure a number of pollutants, but including particular matter and then create an IQI score based on the particular matter levels. If you want to look up the IQI for your area, airnow.gov, you can put in your zip code and it will show you what the current air quality is and it gives you this little sort of. I'll call it an odometer style reading that also gives you a forecast down the bottom, you know, today, good air quality tomorrow, whenever I happen to take this. I don't remember what data I took the screen cap, but whenever this was the next day was predicted to be moderate. Certainly, if you're, you know, helping someone who's sort of less comfortable with scientific information and interpreting data, helping them figure out where to get their quality information. This is the most straightforward place to point people. If you're a little more fast-style and you want to look at stuff, I would recommend actually using this, which is the fire and smoke map. We found it fire.airnow.gov. This is actually a pilot program, so it changes a little bit. But it's got a couple of different pieces of information on here. So it includes that same data that gets put on the air now page. I should do a minute ago. These circles represent the sort of expensive high quality stationary EPA monitors. You can see there's one here on this image and one up here. This is a screen cap I happen to take last week up in the Chico area. It's also about these little squares on it. So these are low cost sensors. These ones haven't been made by purple air if you have heard of those before. And so what this map does is it's integrating information from both the expensive EPA monitors and the low cost purple air sensors. And if you click on a particular one, that's what this arrow is to show you. I'm clicking on this guy. It'll pop up information to show you more information about that monitor at this time. So again, at the time I took this screen cap that monitor was showing an orange, meaning it was unhealthy for sensitive groups, including children. It'll show you that same little odometer. Like we saw on the air now page, but it also shows you a trend. So this is saying that right now this monitor is increasing to the red range. And if you click down. You see on the right here, there's this series of dots that'll give you more information when you get to the trend one. It gives you some more information here that the short term trend at this low cost sensor suggests that this PM 2.5 concentration is increasing toward the unhealthy range. So this is orange right now, but it's headed toward red unhealthy. And these are colored. Let me go backwards. All of these dots are colored based on the a QI level. So you can see at that time when I took it, the sort of western outskirts of Chico, we're still in the green range. But then it was getting yellow orange red as you move towards paradise. And then it's just to let folks know I definitely always would recommend using that us EPA page, but I often get questions about well, if we're using purple air sensors on that us EPA page, why can't you just use the purple air map. So there are a couple reasons I'd suggest using the other one one is that purple airs built in correction factor, basically the way it turns their measurement into an a QI type reading. So that's less accurate. You can select the us EPA conversion factor. That's what I've circled here. So that helps a bit. But the way they do their colors, I find actually a little bit misleading. So this was taken at the exact same time as that image up above. And you can see this monitor that was showing up orange is already showing up red and this one. Part of that has to do with the averaging time. So if you look here, you can see a 10 minute average. But part of it also has to do with the way they color things. So you know, this looks like a very dark orange this 92. But that's actually still in the moderate range, right. Moderate is 50 to 100. So for a couple of reasons, I think this one can be a bit more misleading. So I'd suggest using this fire dot air now dot go map. If you want to use one that gives you some better spatial sense, let's you see sort of within my area where the areas that are better air quality. You know, if you lived in Chico at this moment, you were trying to decide where to take your kids to a park to play. You definitely want to go to the park that's over here on the West edge of Chico, not the one on the East edge. All right. So having talked a little bit about a QI and where you can get that information. Let's talk next about indoor air quality. Improving your indoor air is the best thing that you can do to help protect yourself and children's health during wildfire events. And that includes both your indoor air at home. And if you're a school administrator or you know, you have control over some other building, making sure that all of those buildings have the best indoor air quality that they can. So what determines how much of the outside air comes inside. There's really three things. So there's mechanical ventilation, right. Do you have some sort of each fact system that pushing air inside. There's natural ventilation, right. Have you opened windows if you open doors that'll allow air to come in. And then there's also infiltration. So there's some amount of air that comes into a building anyway, right. You can think of this as sort of like the leakiness of the building. And sometimes the response when there's bad outdoor air like during a wildfire smoke event, people say, oh, well, no problem. I'm just going to like shrink wrap my house, right. I'm going to totally seal it down and stop all of these methods of air coming in. So that will be a problem. Well, the issue is if you stop all of those methods of air coming in. You'll actually have problems with pollution that's made indoors and you'll have issues with moisture and mold. So that's not actually the solution that people think that it is. So the key is to actually filter your air because you still want to have airflow. And so you want to make sure that the airflow that's coming in instead of coming most of it coming in through natural ventilation or for infiltration that it's coming in in a filtered way as much as it can. So if you have a track the way to do that is to pick a filter that traded, Merve 13 that's minimum efficiency rating value, M E R D 13 or higher. And that way you make sure that most of the air coming in is coming in through a filter. If you don't have central air, then you can use portable air filters and you want to make sure they have a high enough green air delivery rate for your space. We'll talk more about that in a moment. So just to recap the difference between ventilation and filtration right ventilation is exchanging air and it's really important for decreasing air pollutant levels from indoor sources. We've talked a lot about ventilation in this last year in light of COVID right. And in schools improve ventilation has actually been associated with decreased absences and improves math and language performance. So there are real benefits to ventilating. Even not talking about wildfire smoke right just making sure that we're moving the usual pollutants around and ventilating to get things out. Filtration is important for filtering contaminants so that can help decrease air pollutant levels from both indoor and outdoor sources right. It can filter your your air that's produced indoors and it can also filter the air that's coming up from outdoors. And as I said a moment ago back and either be a filter in an HVAC system or a standalone air cleaner. You want to make sure that those standalone cleaners are non ozone producing and I'll show you a resource in a minute for looking those up. In schools improved filtration has been associated with decreases in asthma morbidity. So there's a group that calculated if they were to do sort of similar filtration interventions in the whole Detroit school district. They would expect there to be a 13% decrease in things like asthma exacerbations and visits to school nurse and asthma absences in their school district. And then improved filtration has also been associated with higher test scores. Again, those are all non wildfire times just sort of in regular school operations. Specifically looking at studies during wildfires there are fewer of them partially just from a logistics standpoint. It's really hard to plan an intervention study that has to be able to, you know, go at a moment's notice whenever the smoke hits. But there's a modeling study that was done in Southern California homes from some colleagues up at Lawrence Berkeley that showed that. Increasing the HVAC to run continuously even with a lower mervrated filter. Actually decreased indoor particular matter levels during wildfires. Of course, if you continuously run it with an improved filter that has a bigger decrease and interestingly just increasing the filter but not running the air through the filter as frequently right so having sort of an intermittent HVAC operation instead of continuous. Actually didn't decrease as much as just continuously running HVAC. So I think this is one of those those good reminders that that got reaction of like, oh, there's smoke out. Let's not run the HVAC very much. Let's not pull in air from the outdoors can actually be problematic because then you still have that air infiltrating through those other ways, right sort of through the leaky building envelope, but you're not filtering it. So there's a lot of experiments with a portable air filter the useful portable air filter without a central air system decrease particular matter levels about 45% obviously improved with use of a HVAC simultaneously. There's an older study about 20 years ago from the hoop of Valley that tested a variety of in of different interventions during a wildfire smoke event and looked at health benefits. And interestingly filtration in people's homes was the only intervention that had health benefits, including just leaving the smokey area right completely going somewhere else. And those authors speculate that part of that might be that filtration is more sustainable right if you have especially long wildfire smoke events like we had last year right I couldn't have left my home for six weeks left the entire state of California for six weeks to get away from the smoke right that just wouldn't have been feasible. But I can filter I can filter my indoor air for that long and so that may well be be part of the reason that that was seen. And there's a study out of British Columbia that took a number of homes and child portable air cleaners sort of with true versus sham filtration and found that the portable air cleaner intervention, the particular matter levels in the homes decreased about 65% during wildfire smoke events so really substantial decreases. Alright, so to recap that indoor air stuff put it all on one slide if you've got a track you want to move 13 filters are higher. If you've got port if you don't have a track and you need to use a portable air cleaner or if you need to want to do that in addition. There's a nice resource from the California Air Resources Board time about how to choose portable air cleaners and how to make sure that you're avoiding ozone generating ones. I would say that the easiest way to avoid ozone generating air cleaners is to make sure that you're using a mechanical air cleaner rather than an electronic one. So you don't want one of the ones that produces ions you want one of the ones that has a filter in it. There's also some emerging data on what people call these DIY air cleaners so there's a screen cap on the right of the Puget Sound Cleaner Agency showing how to make your own air cleaner basically using a box fan. And in some way attaching a more 13 filter to the front of it and you're then pushing air through that filter. I think it's not clear yet what the longevity of these is so if you have the ability to build to buy a commercial air filter that's probably preferable. There was just recently an underwriters laboratory study looking at the safety of these sort of DIY air cleaner devices that suggest that as long as you're using a modern fan with them. So that's roughly 2012 I think or later that these are likely safe, likely no increase in fire danger that may not be true with older box fans. And there's there's data to show that these can really decrease the indoor particular matter levels. As I said, I there's I don't know of any yet though looking at the longevity of these devices. How long those are those will last before you burn out the fan. So definitely something to just keep in mind. But potentially a much lower cost option. The other thing is if you don't have the ability to make your own indoor air clean at home, it's really good to know where to find a cleaner shelter. I think one good way to do that is to just know what air district here in so some app on the right of the air districts in California. Oftentimes the air district web pages will put information about clean air shelters and then also local news sources. So this is a screen cap of last fall, for example, with information on clean air centers in Oakland. I know that a car the California resources board is working on sort of a centralized place of information for clean air shelters, but I think that's still in progress at this point. Alright, so we spoke a bit about indoor air as the best option. Most sustainable option, you can protect the most people sort of most bang for your back, right? Let's talk a little bit about masks and respirators. So when we're thinking about mask and respirators for things like wildfire smoke. Things like air pollution where you're trying to protect the wearer. And I'll give a slight caveat here for a second and just say that's different. Of course, then use of face coverings, masks, respirators for things like COVID, right, where there's both sort of what folks would call source control, right, trying to protect you from my respiratory droplets as well as trying to protect me. So I'm going to set that aside for a second. We're just talking about masks and respirators for wildfire smoke. So in this setting, there are two things to think about. There's the filtration. That's how many of the particles can pass through the material and then the leakage, right, how many of the particles can pass around the material. Alright, with that framework in mind, let's talk about different kinds of masks. So on the left is an image of myself and my family wearing cloth masks early in the COVID pandemic. And these are useful for decreasing transmission of infectious droplets, right. But for some fabric types, PM 2.5 concentration might actually be higher inside the mask. There is at least one study that demonstrated some concentrating effects from some fabrics for these fine particles. And there are multiple studies showing that there's huge variation in how much cloth can filter. And that doesn't, that's not surprising, right, like if I walk into Joanne fabrics or I walk into Michaels or one of these places, it's not as though I can say, yes, I want the fabric that filters 95% of particles from the fabric. He's point me to that aisle. Right. That's not how our fabric is designed or manufactured. And so there's just this huge variety. And so what I say about this is I would not depend on cloth masks for protection. Is it possible that some might give you some protection? Definitely possible. But there's no third party organization that's able to tell you how much protection. And so I absolutely would not rely on cloth masks for protection from wildfire smoke. Medical masks or surgical masks. These are these, you know, multi layer non woven disposable masks. When NIOSH is untesting of these, the average decreases in exposure to small particles is somewhere in the range of 15 to 40%. Other groups that have tested these kinds of masks have found decreases of 33 to 60%. It's quite a wide range. So only one study I know of that's looked specifically at surgical masks for children. That one found a decrease in exposure of actually 66% or more. I think the reason that one was so much was they had nurses actually putting these on kids. And these were surgical masks that instead of having the ear loops like his most common hot ties that tied to the back of the head and they were tied on pretty snugly. I think a big reason that this exposure decrease was so much more than what was found in some of these other studies I mentioned. It's just that the fit was much better, right? So for talking week we think back to my slide with fit and then leakage. If you decrease the leakage a lot, you're going to have less exposure. And then the third kind of I'll say in air quotes mask because industrial hygienists will appropriately have a connection if I call this a mask. So the first type of thing to consider is a respirator and 95s or one type of respirator if you're familiar with that term. The use of respirators in the general public is quite different than the use in, for example, a worker population where many of us are used to thinking about these. And the second thing that I think is that you're then using a respirator outside of what we would call a respiratory protection program right so workplaces have these programs that in addition to doing things like fit testing and medical evaluations they have to do training and all this right. So when we're thinking about use of respirators by the general public, we're thinking about this in the absence of fit testing. And seven niosch paper a couple others as well, looking at the use of respirators in adults without fit testing. Certainly these and 95 respirators do not perform as well unfit tested as they do fit tested that's not a surprise to anyone. But overall the 95th percentile for filtering face piece respirators like 95s was 70% meaning that 95% of them filtered at least 70% of the particles. And children specifically there have just been a couple of studies there was one done in Dutch children using actually an FFP to which is the European equivalent of an 95. Those children had 92 to 97% decreases in exposure. This is the same study the surgical mass study I mentioned above so again these were secured very snugly to these kids. And also the first ever study looking specifically at a respirator designed for kids in Singapore two years ago now and they were able to achieve what's called a quantitative mask fit meaning they were able to do fit testing with these kids and get a mask fit in a respirator designed for kids. So take with a grain of salt of course because this is you know a manufacturer's proprietary data. But 3M has also shared that they'll have some proprietary data on 95 or FFP to testing in children in other countries that suggests that with products designed specifically for children you can get good fits. Obviously those don't exist in the US market right now. Alright, so this is a summary graphic that we put together at the Western States Paisu we have a version of this that's available on our web page. The idea here is we wanted to just sort of compare and contrast for folks. If there's wildfire smoke outside and it's creating unhealthy conditions how much benefit can you get from these different kinds of masks. We don't have cloth on here at all because as I said I do not recommend relying on cloth face masks for protection from wildfire smoke. Medical masks will give about being conservative probably a 20-ish percent reduction in exposure. And so if you're in the unhealthy range the medical mask will bring you lower within the unhealthy range if you're at the very bottom of the unhealthy range you might actually get into the unhealthy for sensitive groups. And I also had a 995 mask one that's not fit tested. We would still expect to have somewhere in the ballpark of about an 80% reduction in exposure. And so that will bring you down to the moderate range in unhealthy conditions that still not as good as what you would expect with a fit tested and 95 right. If you were able to be fit tested and be a worker and a protection program all that you would expect to be able to get to the good range from unhealthy. But it's still better than nothing right an 80% reduction is still substantial. As I said we have a version of this on our web page the one on the web page does not have the fit tested. Graphic on it and that's just because for the general public those are not available right so. But I think for an audience like you guys where they're likely many many industrial hygienists listening. I wanted to just sort of put this on here is that that's an anchor point that people are familiar with. We also have some infographics on our web page at the western states pace you sort of on overall how to reduce wildfire smoke exposure for kids. So this is stuff that we've talked about today the top row is sort of the you know general advice, which is either to go somewhere without smoke or to improve your indoor air right so you can have some decrease by going inside and shutting windows but not that much right because you really are better to filter. And so that's why you want to use a track with a more 13 filter or a portable HEPA filter and then the render that for short periods of time masks maybe beneficial whoops masks maybe beneficial as well. So wearing a small size 995. You would expect somewhere in the range of about an 80% reduction wearing a medical mask somewhere in the range of about a 20%. A lot of children especially older like school age children can actually fit an adult small nioche and 95 mask. But it's again of course really variable based on face shape and size and all that kind of stuff. You can also have some decreases based on just recirculating the air in your car this graphics available on our web page as well as the same information in another format. Depending on what you like in terms of your aesthetics. So I mentioned we have a number of resources on our web pages is what the wildfire page looks like. So there's a number of different fact sheets and videos and all of that. I know this is misbehaving apologies friends. So you can see our web page there we've also got a Twitter handle where we advertise a lot of our stuff. Very soon we have a new story of health chapter being released. So the story of health is a continuing education course for health professionals of all various kinds. It uses fictional stories to talk about how the environment affects health and disease and well being. We've got a number of chapters available already you can see on the left there we've got asthma developmental disabilities leukemia reproductive health cognitive decline with CE credit available for all those. And we have this new wildfire health impacts story that is going to be released. I think sometime within the next couple of weeks that will have a free CE credits through the CDC covering again a lot of this information that I've talked about today. As well as ways of you know if you're a medical provider how to prepare your office for wildfire events. And think about you know all of these different components we've been talking about. Alright so just to wrap up before I take questions. So there are a number of health effects from wildfire smoke those can reach a large population like we talked about at the start. Children are uniquely vulnerable because of their change differences in physiology. They're ongoing development and the fact that they have behavioral differences compared to adults. The best described health effects for children during wildfire smoke events are respiratory. But we're you know definitely learning more and more about other effects as time goes on. And then in terms of ways to respond during wildfire smoke events we talked about where to get your info. We talked about ways to clean your indoor air. And we talked about what kinds of masks can be most helpful that we expect that N95s are going to be most helpful even in the absence of fit testing. But that of course just how helpful those are is going to depend on how good the fizz whether you're an adult or a kid. It's all about how well that fits you. Alright Michelle would you like me to stop my share to do questions. What would be better. Totally up to you. Let's do that for now. So we do have some questions rolling in. So at this time if you have any questions, please do feel free to enter into them into the online Q&A box. We prefer them in the Q&A versus the chat just because the chat can get a bit busy. So you want to make sure we see your question the Q&A box is the way to go. So we have a couple of follow up questions related to N95s. Is there a way to do a quasi fit test for an N95 mask at home if you don't have the fit testing available through an employer. Yeah, really good question. So there's not a way to truly do a fit test. But what I would recommend doing is doing what we call a seal check. And we actually on that page that I showed you for the pace who have a little graphic on how to do a seal check with kids. Basically the idea is that as you put it on, you should be able to if you take a deep breath in or have your child take a deep breath in you should be able to see the mask sort of suck in towards the face a little bit. And if you exhale, somewhat forcibly not you know you're not the big bad wolf blowing down the house, but somewhat somewhat forcibly right you should see them ask push out a little bit. And what you can do is you can sort of feel around the edges as you do that and feel for air pushing out around the edge or or put you pulled in. And if you feel that leakage, you want to sort of adjust and you know make sure you've pushed down the the nose piece well adjust the positioning of the straps to try and see if you can get a better seal. Thank you. This actually leads into another question. Someone was wondering in terms of data on the efficiency of user conducted seal set tests. Is there any data that you've seen or a research on the efficiency of doing those user seal tests. So good question. There is some data in adults and it's really variable depending on the scenario partially because I'll say especially in things like emergencies. Often the information isn't getting to people super well. So there's a study for example describing and 95 use by the public in post Katrina cleanup showing that like a huge portion of people were wearing them upside down with the nose clip by their chin and you know these sorts of like major fit issues. I don't know of any studies looking specifically at those kinds of seal checks for children because this is just an area that hasn't been studied that much. As I sort of alluded to in the presentation, there's enough information to think that children are probably similarly protected using 95s as adults, especially as you get older children sort of school age children and older. But that's going to be entirely dependent on the fit. Unfortunately, different brands. There's no standard sizing right so different brands have small medium large some just have small and large some just have regular and large and what's a regular versus a medium versus a small can be different between different brands. That's frustrating. I wish that weren't the case. But you know, so sort of exploring and seeing what the smaller options are that you can find and trying them for your child and seeing what kind of fit you can get is the best advice I can give at this point. Hopefully in the future some of that framework will will change. Thank you so much. Someone added a note in workplace settings medical clearance is required for 95 where is there a risk that we should be thinking about people with respiratory problems where an 95 about being medically cleared first. Really good question. I think there are a number of things to consider. So one is that there's not actually a lot of data on what exactly is needed for respiratory clearance. There's a lot of sort of reliance on the fact that if someone's healthy enough to work they're probably healthy enough to be respiratory respiratorily cleared. You know, that's tough because it means that there's not sort of specific things that we can look at or point to. I'd say in some sense we've been doing sort of an interesting experiment this whole last year with everyone wearing other kinds of face coverings because the pressure drop across in the 95 is often actually much less than the drop across something like a cloth mask. And so, you know, the fact that so many people have tolerated cloth masks relatively well actually probably implies that that folks can tolerate at 95s, but I think the general advice that we always give from the piece you. Because that you should only be using 95s of kids who are old enough to tell you and to be able to express if they're having a problem right like if they say I don't feel good i'm having trouble breathing I feel like headed you take it off right and that's why it's it's good to have an indoor space that's clean. So you have an option to be in a clean indoor space and you don't have to keep wearing that in 95. Thank you. So, a couple of questions about the difference between a K and 95 and 95. Yeah, so it's funny because I used to never get that question because international products weren't allowed in the US right and with some of the changes due to COVID they were temporarily allowed onto the US market and theoretically I think that's actually supposed to be stopping now but I would say a couple of things. So one, I don't know if you noticed, but on my graphics actually specifically called out and NIOSH certified and 95s not just 95 and that was intentional and 95 is not in any way like a protected or restricted term so I could so am ask and call it an 95 because I felt like calling it an 95 and there's nobody to stop me from doing that. So make sure that it's a NIOSH certified and 95 so you know that that means something. K and 95s do not have to meet the same standards as NIOSH certified and 95 specifically actually the regulations are quite different about fit and as we talked about earlier right there's two things to think about when you think about masks there's the filtration component and the fit component. So 95s don't have to meet a fit component you can have huge amounts of leakage around them and that's also why many folks have noticed can 95s often have ear loops whereas the N95s very rarely do and I don't think I can think of any N95s that have ear loops and it's because they're required to fit better and so they have to be being pulled tighter to your face so. I would really stick with NIOSH certified and 95s and the other problem and NIOSH illustrated this really nicely early in the pandemic when they tested some of the can 95s coming in that there was just really wide variability and how well those were performing. Thank you so much that's a great answer. We had somebody else asking about PM 2.5 being strongly and consistently associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular outcomes is that something that you also see in children. So yeah the question is right it is very consistently associated with cardiovascular outcomes in adults that's much less commonly seen in kids and that's partially just because cardiovascular disease is quite different in kids right the kinds of cardiac disease we see in kids is often structural lesions as opposed to. A sort of coronary artery disease and these these kinds of things that are more adult diseases that being said the what I would call the antecedents right the start of those processes almost certainly happen in childhood we're just not measuring those effects in childhood because it takes a lifetime for those to accumulate so. Do I think that wildfire smoke exposure in childhood contributes to adult cardiovascular disease absolutely and there's there's data to show that that's true for other kinds of PM 2.5 exposure there's not yet data specifically linking wildfire smoke exposure and childhood to adult cardiovascular disease but I wouldn't be surprised if we see that there is 30 years from now. Thank you. We also have some questions about the guidelines for schools regarding outside activities during core a qi events and the latest revisions this viewer has seen were from July 2019 are you aware of any new guidelines for schools and outdoor activities whether that be playing outdoor sports or play time anything like that. Yeah, so this gets really tricky so I will say first there is new vans coming out the EPA post production page should have those work group products that were created over this last year that was a collaboration of you know lots of experts in a variety of related fields and there is specific guidance looking at schools and school activities specifically so look for those those should be out soon. One of the things that makes it tough is that as much as we you know as as a field try and make communication on this clear right and the EPA has made this air quality index that has sort of distinct colors and cut points it's a spectrum right and so there's no exact cut point that I can give you where I can say like at this point everything past it is unsafe and everything before this is totally safe right. And I wish that there were like we get calls at the pace who all the time from schools that are like please tell me the magic number at which the kids are safe and I'm like I really want to tell you the magic number but there is no magic number right. And I think there are a number of things that play into that so one is how good is the indoor air that the kids are spending the rest of their time in because. Because spending a little bit of outdoor time playing and slightly worse air probably won't affect you as much if you're going back into really clean air as opposed to if you're in moderately bad air all the time and then you get an additional load. That's one thing the other is that as these events stretch on for long periods of time right and then we're getting exposure over three four or five six weeks kids may have symptoms at lower levels than they were having previously I think. I think the EPA has set up the scale with orange being unhealthy for sensitive groups for a reason because that's the range at which we start to see health effects and kids and so I think using that orange range is sort of your benchmark for where you should be thinking about. Modifying things is a good idea but exactly what that looks like is going to depend a bit on your specific school and what you're able to do are you able to have really good indoor air so then you expect that the kids can probably tolerate a little bit of outside time and that's worth it for their. Mental health and their ability to exercise a little bit of time in the orange right that'll be a little bit different for school that has indoor air that's in the green all of the time as opposed to a school that hasn't had any filtration and those kids are being exposed to orange levels the whole day so it's tough and I wish I wish there was a like super clean super simple answer for you. Thank you. Do you when people ask you about the best cheaper exposure monitoring equipment available do you always recommend purple sensors or are there other types of sensors that you would recommend. Yeah really good question so what I always recommend is that you want to look for something that's been evaluated by a third party right because any manufacturer has plenty of incentives to tell you that their product is great. And so what I always do is the self-coast air monitoring district in Southern California has a program they call the air quality oh gosh I remember that acronym air quality sensor performance evaluation center it's a Q spec a Q hyphen S.P.E.C. And they do evaluations of low cost sensors. And so what I recommend and I'm happy if folks have specific questions about this to follow up with folks. What I recommend is looking at their evaluations and looking for the R squared value basically what they do is they compare these low cost sensors to the expensive fancy EPA monitors. And so you can calculate a coefficient of variation so looking at the R squared value. Seeing how closely the measurements from the low cost sensor track with the measurements from the high quality sensor. And so you want one that that has a really high R squared that those measurements track really well. And so I just remember is that what you're looking for though there is precision that it's following very closely not necessarily accuracy. So it doesn't necessarily mean that 100 measured with a low cost sensor is exactly 100 from a high quality sensor. And so what I always recommend people do I have a whole other lecture that I give on this so I apologize because I'm like cramming it into a two minute answer. What I always recommend people do is use those low cost sensors for trending. So they're really useful like if you have an indoor and an outdoor at your home or at your school right to be able to see the difference between those two numbers super useful for that. But not necessarily to say like, aha, it is exactly 100 right now or it is exactly 112 right now right. So using those as comparisons over time or over space as opposed to trusting a specific number. There's a reason those cost less right that's not it's really useful, but it's not giving you the same quality of information as these thousands of dollar sensors that the EPA uses. Thank you. We have another person here that their group is going to be doing statewide educational materials for parents of young children. Is there a danger in advising using N95 masks with adequate information on how to fit them. Really good question. So what we've been doing at the pace you and your welcome our materials are all public you're welcome to take a look at them. We have a slide about safety where we say that kids should be over to and also able to describe if they're having problems sort of just what I said the fail safe is. If your kid is saying that they're having problems, you take it off and so you shouldn't be using this with a kid who's not yet either old enough or mature enough or verbal enough to be able to tell you if they're having problems. Thank you so much. We are coming to the close of our webinar today. I know there are a few questions we didn't get to so my apologies for that. Thank you so much for your engagement for everyone today. I would like to end with just one last question on how COVID complicates the decision making around outdoor activities during four air quality events. Do you have any any parting thoughts on how to weigh COVID and wildfire exposure indoor outdoor that you'd like to share with the group. Absolutely so we get this question a lot at the pace you and my general response is to always suggest a reframe which is that I actually want us to focus on indoor air quality for both right and so if you're focusing on filtration that's going to help with COVID and it's going to help with wildfire and so we've got this great opportunity where people are actually really interested in ventilation and filtration right now in a way that we haven't always gotten this kind of attention. And so this is a really unique opportunity and I think it's worth using this chance and using frankly there's a lot of funds available to schools for doing things like ventilation and filtration upgrades because of COVID using that opportunity to make these improvements that will help with COVID that will help with wildfires and help with just ongoing air pollution exposure and have a number of benefits for our kids. Thank you so much for joining us today. Thank you for your time. Thank you to our attendees for all of these excellent questions in this discussion today. They are a reminder we will have an email sent to all of you tomorrow afternoon and that'll include the webinar recording and an evaluation link for those of you who logged into the live webinar today. You can be sure to check out our website for more information and to see more about upcoming events and that's coeh at Berkeley.edu. Backslash about CE and we'll also be including a link to today's presentation as well so you'll be able to see the links and the scans and the resources in that presentation PowerPoint that'll all be updated on the website by the time you all get your evaluation and follow the email tomorrow. So thank you so much Dr. Home, we really appreciate your time and have a great day everyone. Thanks for having me Michelle. Bye everybody. Thanks for joining.