Skip to main content
U.S. flag
An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know
Search
Search EPA.gov

Environmental Topics
Laws & Regulations
Report a Violation
About EPA
Burn Wise
CONTACT US
Wood Smoke and Your Health
On this page:
What is wood smoke?
Health effects of wood smoke
Wood smoke & asthma videos
Who is at risk from wood smoke?
Wood smoke and COVID-19
Environmental effects
Related Information
What is wood smoke?
Smoke Detectors
Each year, about 3,000 people die in residential fires in the U.S. – mainly from smoke inhalation. A properly installed and maintained smoke alarm is one of the best and cheapest ways to be warned early of a potentially deadly fire.

Smoke forms when wood or other organic matter burns. The smoke from wood burning is made up of a complex mixture of gases and fine particles (also called particle pollution, particulate matter, or PM).  In addition to particle pollution, wood smoke contains several toxic air pollutants including The following links exit the site

benzene 
formaldehyde
acrolein
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)
The more efficiently you burn wood (e.g., using an EPA-certified wood stove and dry, seasoned wood) the less smoke is created.

Health effects of wood smoke
Information graphic showing the cardiovascular and respiratory effects of wood smoke on health
Click on image to enlarge.  Order 18"X24" poster.
Smoke may smell good, but it's not good for you. The biggest health threat from smoke is from fine particles, also called fine particulate matter or PM2.5. These microscopic particles can get into your eyes and respiratory system, where they may cause burning eyes, runny nose, and illnesses, such as bronchitis.

Fine particles can make asthma symptoms worse and trigger asthma attacks. Fine particles can also trigger heart attacks, stroke, irregular heart rhythms, and heart failure, especially in people who are already at risk for these conditions.

Learn more about the health and environmental effects of fine particles.

Wood Smoke & Asthma Videos
During the wintertime, residential wood smoke is a main contributor to fine particle pollution (PM) and is responsible for poor air quality days in many areas across the United States. The following videos highlight the health effects related to PM exposure from residential wood smoke.



Wood Smoke and Asthma: Reduce Smoke
Wood Smoke and Asthma: Dry Firewood
Who is at risk from wood smoke?
Wood smoke can affect everyone, but the populations known to be at greater risk include: children, teenagers, older adults, people with lung disease -- including asthma and COPD, people with heart disease, outdoor workers, and people of low socioeconomic status, including those who are homeless and with limited access to medical care. Research indicates that obesity or diabetes may also increase risk.  New or expectant mothers may also want to take precautions to protect the health of their babies, because some studies indicate they may be at increased risk.
Air cleaners and air filters in the home
Using a portable air cleaner and/or upgrading the air filter in your furnace or central heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning (HVAC) system can help to improve indoor air quality.  Learn more.

It's important to limit your exposure to smoke—especially if you are more susceptible than others:
 
If you have heart or lung disease, such as congestive heart failure, angina, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, emphysema or asthma, you may experience health effects earlier and at lower smoke levels than healthy people.
Older adults are more likely to be affected by smoke, possibly because they are more likely to have chronic heart or lung diseases than younger people.
Children also are more susceptible to smoke for several reasons:
their respiratory systems are still developing,
they breathe more air (and air pollution) per pound of body weight than adults, and
they are more likely to be active outdoors.
Learn how to reduce wood smoke and lower your risk.

Wood smoke and COVID-19
Wood smoke can irritate your lungs, cause inflammation, affect your immune system, and make you more prone to lung infections, likely including SARS-CoV-2, the virus that cause COVID-19. According to information provided on CDC's website, people who currently have or who are recovering from COVID-19 may be at an increased risk of health effects from exposure to wood smoke due to compromised heart and/or lung function related to COVID-19.

If you are recovering from COVID-19, or are at increased risk for COVID-19, take steps to reduce your exposure to wood smoke.  See additional information on wood smoke and COVID-19.


Know the difference between symptoms from smoke exposure and COVID-19. The following links exit the site.

Symptoms, like dry cough, sore throat, and difficulty breathing can be caused by both smoke exposure and COVID-19.
Learn about CDC's list of  symptoms of COVID-19. Symptoms like fever or chills, muscle or body aches, and diarrhea are not related to smoke exposure. If you have questions about your symptoms, contact a healthcare provider.
If you have severe symptoms, like difficulty breathing or chest pain, immediately call 911 or the nearest emergency facility.
For more information about COVID-19,  go to CDC's Coronavirus (COVID-19) webpage.
Environmental effects of wood smoke
The particles in wood smoke can reduce visibility (haze). Particles can also create environmental and aesthetic damage in our communities and scenic areas – like national parks.  Health resources

Related Information
Health resources

Facts & Figures + Health and Safety Tips

How smoke from fires can affect your health

How wood smoke harms your health

Asthma resources

EPA Asthma website
CDC Asthma website 
NoAttacks.org
Outreach materials

2022 Burn Wise Awareness Kit
Burn Wise Home
What You Can Do
Wood Smoke Resources in Your State
Program Participation
Wood Smoke and Your Health
Consumers
Air Agencies
Businesses
Education and Outreach
Contact Us to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.
LAST UPDATED ON NOVEMBER 7, 2023
United States Environmental Protection Agency
Discover.
Accessibility Statement
Budget & Performance
Contracting
EPA www Web Snapshot
Grants
No FEAR Act Data
Plain Writing
Privacy
Privacy and Security Notice
Connect.
Data
Inspector General
Jobs
Newsroom
Regulations.gov
Subscribe
USA.gov
White House
Ask.
Contact EPA
EPA Disclaimers
Hotlines
FOIA Requests
Frequent Questions
Follow.